In the year 1883, Emma Lazarus penned words that would mark an American generation. Truly they would set in bronze an American ideal. The words: “Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,” and along with the rest of the sonnet, they stand today erected on the base of the statue for which they were written.^[  [Lazarus_undated-km](http://markup.rocks/#Lazarus_undated-km).] To the contemporary American, the Statue of Liberty stands as a symbol of our freedom. Her origin, however, testifies to a specific kind of liberty, namely that granted to the masses of immigrants following hope to the new world. Placed in New York harbor June 19, 1885, the statue welcomed millions of newcomers. In fact, the 35 years that followed the placement of the statue saw the largest mass migration of peoples in United States history until the present era. Latourette wrote, “Here was a movement of peoples which for magnitude was unapproached in the nineteenth century. It has seldom if ever been equalled in the entire history of mankind.”^[  [Latourette1941-fx](http://markup.rocks/#Latourette1941-fx), 224.] Not until recent years has immigration reached a remotely comparable level to the period between 1880 and 1920. America's industrialization and subsequent urbanization coalesced with this first great wave of immigration to create her towering cities and strong commerce. In many ways, today's United States were forged during this era of rapid American growth.

This paper provides a brief survey of missions by Protestants to immigrants in the United States at the turn of the nineteenth century. Descriptive in nature, it will consider first the missions context provided by immigrant groups during this time and will then survey various missions endeavors by Protestant groups. In order to grasp the significance of the church's response to this unique era, the wave of immigration itself must be sketched. A preliminary look at immigrant totals, points of origin, religion and culture frames the need for Great Commission ministry to these people. Knowing where immigrants lived, along with their living conditions and other social factors, provides the necessary foundation for considering specific missionary efforts.

At the close of the nineteenth century, Americans found themselves in the throes of great social change. Many feared the effects of foreign immigrants, with their foreign religions and worldviews. Some saw a threat to democracy from competing political ideologies. Others looked optimistically toward immigration as the supply necessary to meet the demands of taller cities and booming industry. As society adjusted to the new landscape, the church was forced to do likewise. Christ's agent in the world for fulfilling the Great Commission, the church was responsible for making disciples of all nations. Before this time, immigrants tended to come from areas where Protestant Christianity was the norm. In other words, most came from Britain or Germany, and many came as evangelicals. However, during this first great wave, the tides turned and the majority entering the country were Catholic or Jewish, both groups that evangelicals considered in need of the gospel. Additionally, thousands began to come from East Asia’s radically different culture and religion.

Evangelical churches in America were faced with a new missionary task. For almost a century, they had gladly participated in the modern missions movement. Countless missions agencies coordinated the efforts of thousands of local churches to send hundreds of missionaries overseas to some of the very places of origin for many of these immigrants. Now, peoples from these places were making American cities their home. Furthermore, the immigrants themselves often came with a missionary agenda. The Roman Catholic Church poured resources into securing a Catholic footprint in the United States. Additionally, a number of Protestant efforts were launched by immigrants themselves. While most immigrants during this era were not Protestant, a substantial minority were and they attempted to reach their own upon arrival. Missions happened in both directions.

Of particular interest for this study was the varied responses from American Protestants to the immigrant situation. As noted above, many in America were troubled by the influx of newcomers. This was, of course, mirrored in the church as well. However, others saw a situation which merited Christian response. Most major Protestant denominations involved themselves in the work of aiding immigrants, but this work varied in approach and scope. Some, enamored by a social gospel, altered their mission to a program of social education and assimilation, going so far as to discourage evangelism. Others opted for preaching the true gospel and establishing churches while attempting to meet basic human needs.

## 2.1 The Missions Context: Immigration to the United States from 1880-1920

Immigration did not suddenly begin in 1880. The consistent immigration of European migrants was the impetus for establishing the nation. However, noticeable shifts occurred in migration patterns during the nineteenth century. A discernible trajectory led to the rapid acceleration of immigration during the forty-year period straddling the turn of the century. According to Latourette, during the period from 1820 to 1860, approximately five million immigrants entered the country. The Civil War suppressed immigration, but numbers again began to rise after its resolution. The decade from 1880 to 1889 saw another five million, roughly the same amount as had come in the forty year period prior to the Civil War.^[  [Latourette1941-fx](http://markup.rocks/#Latourette1941-fx), 224.] This began a period of staggering growth, where each decade resulted in an average of six million more immigrants. The height of the immigration wave occurred occurred from 1900 to 1909 when more than eight million entered. ^[  [Ward1971-py](http://markup.rocks/#Ward1971-py), 53.] In 1907 alone, almost 1.5 million came.^[  [Latourette1941-fx](http://markup.rocks/#Latourette1941-fx), 224.] An entire industry developed around marketing and transporting immigrants from various locations in Europe. Ship after ship pulled into Ellis Island, the country’s primary immigrant processing center, during the period. Foner wrote, “More than twelve million people passed through its halls between 1892 and 1954, the vast majority landing there in the first three decades of its existence as on immigrant-processing center.”^[  [Foner2002-fq](http://markup.rocks/#Foner2002-fq), 1.]

### 2.1.2 Chain Migration

As Latourette noted, for many immigrants it was an economic decision.^[  [Latourette1941-fx](http://markup.rocks/#Latourette1941-fx), 225.] Howbeit, the reality was more complex. Bodnar claimed, “Explanations for emigration from rural societies often range from a flight from poverty thesis to a newer view which stresses the raised expectations of newcomers and their determination to acquire the riches offered by industrial and urban societies.”^[  [Bodnar1987-xh](http://markup.rocks/#Bodnar1987-xh), 51.] Brinkley, however, asserted that many immigrants were not pushed out of Europe as much as they were pulled out by images of an idealized America. Promises of cheap land, good jobs, and freedom from restrictive governments enticed many, though not all were wooed by niceties. Over a million Jews were, in fact, fleeing persecution in Russia.^[  [Brinkley2015-wc](http://markup.rocks/#Brinkley2015-wc), loc. 4058.]
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEwMzUwNjkxNzRdfQ==
-->