
# Introduction
Eschatology births missiology. Certainly Kahler's statement, as quoted by Bosch, rings true that mission is the mother of theology. However, even Bosch continues by citing Kasemann's claim that apocalyptic serves as the headwaters of theology in the New Testament. Bosch concludes these two ideas–mission and apocalyptic–are complementary.^[Bosch, Transforming Mission, 2 and Endnote 1] Eschatology and missiology stand in unique relationship one to another. One's eschatology provides shape and direction to missions, while one's missiology provides response to convictions concerning the ultimate telos of creation. Walls rightly summarizes this connection, stating, "Eschatology is where theology meets history most intimately, since it is concerned with history’s end and meaning."^[Walls, Eschatology and the Western Missionary Movement, 182.]
 
An eschatological thread can be traced throughout the entire modern missions movements. Stanely writes, "From the genesis of the evangelical Protestant missionary movement in the mid-eighteenth century supporters of Christian missions had drawn from their Bibles the belief that it was the sovereign purpose of God to bring all humanity to the point of submission to the lordship of Jesus Christ."^[Stanely, Future in the Past, 102-103.] This belief in the sovereign purpose of Protestant missions fueled a great deal of missionary endeavors and created the sending engine of Western missions. Stanely continues, "The goal of the Protestant missionary enterprise as understood by its founders was, then, an eschatological one: it was nothing less than the realisation [sic] of the biblical vision of a world transformed by being filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea."^[Stanely, Future in the Past, 103.] Furthermore, it provided structure and substance to the specific tactics of missionary engagement. One's understanding of their missionary activity rested upon their hope for what it would accomplish. In this way, certain aspects of one's eschatology determined the activities they classified as missions and the manner in which these activities would be executed. Key doctrines, such as millennial views and one's understanding of the kingdom of God, became bell weathers for particular missionary hopes and methods.
 
During certain eras in missions history, the eschatological thread becomes clearly visible as grounding for missionary activity. The Gilded Age and early Progressive Era in American history is one such time. Key doctrines, such as millennial views and one's understanding of the kingdom of God, became bell weathers for particular missionary hopes and methods by Protestant Americans. While this connection has been noted before concerning international mission efforts by American Protestants, the influence on home missions was no less significant, especially concerning cross-cultural missions toward the burgeoning immigrant populations of the era.^[Rogers, A Bright New Constellation, traces the impact of millennial narratives on the development of American Protestant foreign missions.] Though not the exclusive factor, Protestant majority views on the millennium and the kingdom of God significantly influenced applied home missionary methods toward immigrants from 1880-1920, resulting in a syncretized mission to Christianize and Americanize the immigrant.
 
By the turn of the twentieth century, postmillennialism was the dominant eschatological position concerning the millennium. Furthermore, the millennial expectation was increasingly tied to human initiative and the ideal of progress. Moorhead writes, "Although the union of progress with the symbols of the Apocalypse may strike the contemporary reader as awkward or quaint, its widespread popularity suggests that postmillennialism-with all its antinomies-must be taken seriously if one wishes to understand the world as it appeared to many persons only a few generations ago."^[Moorhead, Between Progress, 525-526.] For the overwhelming majority of Protestants during the era, America civilization was conflated with the coming kingdom of God. Therefore, home missions to immigrants was cast as a dual mission to Christianize and Americanize those coming from abroad. For some Protestants, these new immigrants from different cultures were seen as a threat to the developing American civilization, which made them a threat for Protestants laboring to build the kingdom of God. For others, the arrival of these immigrants was an opportunity to showcase the superiority of Christian and American civilization, as it converted them to both. Regardless, both conflated the Christian mission with the cultural mission of American assimilation.
 
This paper will first consider the development of the dominant Protestant understanding of the millennium by tracing its origins, outlining its growth and entrenchment in the American Protestant conscience, and demonstrating its significance at the turn of the twentieth century. If American Protestants eschatological presuppositions grounded a mission of optimistically building the coming kingdom, then the content of that kingdom ideal comes to the fore in any applied theology. This paper will subsequently examine certain theologies of the kingdom, especially those influenced by Alrbecht Ritschl, and their role in crafting missionary missionary methods. Finally, the paper will survey missionary methods toward immigrants during the Gilded Age and early Progressive Era to showcase their reliance on Protestant eschatological commitments.
 
# Presupposition 1: The Development of the American Protestant Postmillennial Mindset

In 1911, Volume III of *A Dictionary of the Bible* included an article defining the theological concept of the millennium. The article was written by William Adams Brown, a prominent professor of systematic theology at Union Theological Seminary. Brown defines the the term millennium,

> "A name suggested by the period of 1000 years described in Rev 20:4-7, during which Satan is confined in the abyss, and the martyr saints reign with Christ. Hence variously understood, according to the interpretation put upon the passage, either as (1) the period, present or future, definite or indefinite, 'during which the kingdom of Christ will be established upon earth, and will dominate over all other authority' (Cent. Diet.); or more specially (2) as the period in which 'Christ will reign in bodily presence on earth for a thousand years' (Oxf. Eng. Dict. s. 'Chiliasm')."^[Brown, Millennium, Dictionary, 370.]

Brown's definition serves as a typical explanation of the millennium from his era, and in the article, he makes two significant points concerning the prevailing eschatological views of Protestant Americans at that time. First, Brown rather quickly dismisses premillennialism. While noting its continued existence, Brown states that the position lives at the margins of opinion and had ultimately failed to garner the support of the Protestant church. Brown writes, "Pre-millenarian views have, indeed, been revived from time to time, now in grosser, now in more spiritual form, and have never been without their advocates in the Church ; but they have failed to win general acceptance." ^[Brown, Millennium, Dictionary, 373.] Second, Brown notes the prominence of Amillennialism and especially Postmillennialism. He continues, "The Church as a whole, Protestant as well as Catholic, has either adopted Augustine's identification of the Millennium with the Church militant, or else looks for a future period of prosperity, preceding the second advent of Christ."^[Brown,  Millennium, Dictionary, 373.]

## Postmillennialism: The Majority View
Brown's assertion concerning the prominence of the postmillennial position in the Gilded Age and beginning of the Progressive era enjoys wide support.^[Numerous sources confirm the prevalence, and even ubiquity, of the postmillennial position in the United States throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. See Smith, Gary Scott. Heaven in the American Imagination. Oxford University Press, 2011, 128; Utzinger, [Yet Saints Their Watch are Keeping](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Yet-Saints-Their-Watch-are-Keeping-75638bd9421a40ff97632e08963194eb#fbe2e487d3eb4513af452531100934c5), 111; Ahlstrom, A Religious History of the American People, 845; Moorhead, Between Progress, 525-526.] Sydney Ahlstrom writes that the American of this era was "characteristically a 'postmillennialist.'"^[Ahlstrom,  [A Religious History of the American People](https://www.notion.so/keelan/A-Religious-History-of-the-American-Peoplw-30c17ca9fc9b499fbeec43804c29208c#3269e223c0d14b3b968862fa7d36b3db), 845.] James Moorhead records that clergymen of the nineteenth century referred to postmillennialism as "the commonly received doctrine."^[Moorhead, [Between Progress](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Between-Progress-and-Apocalypse-95850055e4ef495daa76aadcd6ce63c8#e24d378e947f4693ac63baac584ce782), 525.] As Brown notes, it would be overstatement to insist that every American Protestant adhered to a postmillennial eschatology, but it was certainly the majority perspective for at least a century. This perspective did much to impact both the fabric of American culture and the missionary methods of those Protestants. Moorhead writes,

> "As a distinct philosophy of history, postmillennialism dates from the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Although the notion that Jesus would return after the millennium had been advanced much earlier, it had not been made the key to the meaning of time. During that period, however, postmillennialism became more than a matter of dating the Second Coming: It came to denote an understanding of history as gradual improvement according to rational laws that human beings could learn and use."^[Moorhead, [Between Progress](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Between-Progress-and-Apocalypse-95850055e4ef495daa76aadcd6ce63c8#3dd9eace416d4cf4bf88bfa648743d20), 526.]

This theological optimism and confidence in the gears of progress roots deep into the religious history of the nation, and finds it's beginnings prior to the nineteenth century.

## British Beginnings (Prior to 1800)
The Protestant conversation concerning the millennium certainly predates American Protestantism. In fact, a robust dialogue was occurring in England that laid much of the groundwork for the theological presuppositions which would support the American mindset. A divergence developed between those who believed the physical return of Christ was necessary for entering the millennium and those who felt history and human initiative would propel humanity toward the coming kingdom and a millennial reign of peace and prosperity. In 1703, Daniel Whitby authored the significant  _Paraphrase and Commentary on the New Testament_, in which he delivered a lengthy and systematic rebuttal to what he called the millenarian position, instead arguing for a millennialist position that would today be described as postmillennialism.^[Whitby, Paraphrase and Commentary on the New Testament, London: W. Bowyer, 1703, 247-278, provides a multiple-chapter treatise on the millennium, which is a very long and detailed refutation of a premillennialist (millenarian) position. In this section, he specifically addresses the doctrine from historical and biblical perspective, providing both a detailed history of interpretation for the early church on the issue and a survey of biblical material on the issue. He negatively refutes certain positions of the millenarian view, he positively affirms others, and he concludes with his own understanding that serves as one of the earliest Protestant systematic treatments in favor of a postmillennialist position.] However, consistent nomenclature for these divergent views alludes wide acceptance.

Throughout the history of the conversation, the debate has been termed as "millenarians vs. millennialists", "millenarians vs. millenists", and "premillennialists vs. postmillennialists" among other less-accepted options. Perhaps Ernest Tuveson most siginificantly swayed the conversation toward the use of millenarians (premillennialists) and millennialists (postmillennialists). Tuveson notes that the Protestant conversation concerning the millennium was alive and well at least as far back as the seventeenth century, and he finds the commonly accepted terms today as unhelpful monikers for earlier views.^[Tuveson,  [Redeemer Nation](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Redeemer-Nation-7bcf4d95c2e44e5a80a9e37ced9a0aa7#4f15ef0bd5314a23b1ad5139458b0ec7), 34. See also Tuveson, Millennium and Utopia, 71-112, for a thorough treatment of eschatological development in British Protestant thought prior to the 1800s.] Walls concurs, asserting the terms premillennialism and postmillennialism had not been invented in the early centuries of the Protestant debate on eschatology.^[Walls,  [Eschatology and the Western Missionary Movement](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Eschatology-and-the-Western-Missionary-Movement-a4e4bd4eb99e43cd8482eb5b0950ac85#18854fe82a584e4187bf9d3a1826964d), 190.]

General commentary and academic debate concerning the nature of the millennium was happening extensively in Britain. Millenarians, for their part, placed little confidence in society at large and humanity's ability to bring about lasting progress.^[Sandeen,  [Roots](https://www.notion.so/keelan/The-Roots-of-Fundamentalism-51bdfa4bb11845cb9fa3fe40e69a1717#6aa7636b43f14361a132ef57faf06199), 13.] Progressive millennialists, on the other hand, placed increasing trust in the wheels of progress as God's providential tool in history to bring about his kingdom. Tuveson points to a secularization thesis, beginning prior to the eighteenth century, that increasingly influenced millennialist thought and in turn shaped Protestantism and Western society as a whole. Taken from this perspective, the millennialist theology was as significant to the modern, historically positivist understanding of progress as secular enlightenment philosophy.^[Tuveson,  [Millennium and Utopia](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Millennium-and-Utopia-300bec85c1fd4d71a6e7a4ad34866bd3#3e6fb6ceb3a748c5851aec8e7f747d87), 75.] Over time, the concepts of Providence were wed to those of natural law, humanity's social and religious development, and the laws of universal progress.^[Tuveson, Millennium and Utopia, 139, 149, 152, outlines the trajectory of millennial doctrine as it increasingly conflates first with the concept of natural law and subsequently with the scientific ideas of social and racial progress, ultimately culminating the a doctrine of progress as universal law.] 

By the eighteenth century, the millennialist position was generally accepted by the majority of Britisth Protestants. Despite certain groups advocating for a millenarian position during the French Revolution, views such as the Puritan "Fifth Monarchy" did more to distance many Protestants from the movement. Sandeen writes,

> "In reaction to the excesses of the Puritan revolution, millenarianism fell into disfavor in the eighteenth century, but churchmen did not return to the Augustinian position. In harmony with the Lockean tradition of rationalism and optimism, a new eschatology, most influentially stated by the Salisbury rector Daniel Whitby, emphasized the continued success of the church, the steady improvement of man and society, and the eventual culmination of Christian history in the coming of a literal millennium. Only at the end of that blessed age was Christ's second coming expected."^[Sandeen,  [Roots of Fundamentalism](https://www.notion.so/keelan/The-Roots-of-Fundamentalism-51bdfa4bb11845cb9fa3fe40e69a1717#989e1c7f325f4f29bc1c0bfe75f726e7), 5.]

Whitby's new way served as the foundation for the development of an increasingly secular understanding of progress as an analog to millennial expectations. British Protestants were not looking for the imminent return of King Jesus.^[Sandeen,  [Roots](https://www.notion.so/keelan/The-Roots-of-Fundamentalism-51bdfa4bb11845cb9fa3fe40e69a1717#f4130ecffff0412fa2a29119f5d897df), 12.]

Instead, they were increasingly confident in the wheels of human progress, especially the efforts of the church in directing society, as the agent of the coming kingdom. This early Protestant millennial optimism would not stay in Britain, however, as a new nation was being established across the ocean.

## A Revolutionary Idea?
In the United States, a largely Protestant America was ripe for millennial speculation. The American religious landscape was a true offspring of European Protestantism, especially that of British separatists. De Jong writes,

> A significant dimension of this stimulation was the British eschatological heritage... The earliest as well as the most recent British commentators and theologians were read and recommended for study in the American missionary awakening. These British sources must be seen as reinforcing the Edwardean and more broadly evangelical eschatology already accepted by Americans and as calling Americans to assume the missionary responsibilities implied in their eschatology."^[De Jong, As the Waters, 213.]

The continued dialogue of British and American theologians and ministers created a mutually enforcing feedback loop concerning millennialist expectations. In doing so, they developed a rather homogeneous viewpoint. De Jong continues,

> "American and British sources on the latter days intertwined to give an eschatological interpretation to the French Revolution in Europe, to the Infidelity on both sides of the Atlantic, to the revivals, and to missionary movement. These were seen as signs of further progress in the rapid approach of the millennium. And an awareness of the impending climax of history gave new urgency to missionary and benevolent enterprises."^[De Jong, As the Waters, 214.]

This intercontinental perspective served as the eschatological foundation for the significant majority of American Protestants until the beginning of the Twentieth Century.

Despite its British origins, however, the new world provided a unique context to those theologizing about the millennium. American theologians of the mid-eighteenth century placed significance in the development of the new world, claiming providence was at play in shaping the kingdom to come. In contrast to the increasingly secular trajectory of millennialism in Britain, the American variety was initially revivalistic in nature. Perhaps the most influential American theologian of the eighteenth century, Jonathan Edwards attributed the coming of the millennium to the outburst of revivals in Scotland, Wales, and America. Kling writes,

> "According to Edwards, this new age would not come through cataclysmic means (as earlier interpreters had suggested), but through natural means, through the outpouring of God's Spirit manifested in Christian teaching, preaching, and religious activity... Christian activity was a precondition of the coming new age, for Christians who engaged in benevolent activities, social reform, and missionary outreach actually played a divinely ordained role in ushering in the kingdom of Christ."^[Kling, New Divinity, Loc. 242.]

While it was the natural laws of human civilization and progress that would bring about the change for many in England, it was the intentional spread of the gospel that would cover the entire earth through missions emanating outward from America. Speaking of the first Great Awakening, Handy writes, "Yet there was a pervasive sense among the awakeners and those whom they influenced that the future belonged to them and their way. They felt they were witnesses to the coming of the millennium, which God would bring to fulfillment in the not too distant future."^[Handy, A Christian America, 18.] Edwards served as the fountainhead of a distinctly American Protestant postmillennialism. His influence cannot be overstated when considering the rise of the New Divinity movement, which traces its roots back into Edwards.

While it is widely accepted that the Protestant American missionary fervor found it's early voice through the influence of New Divinity, so did the closely intertwined issue of eschatology. In many ways, millennialism was the basis for this missionary fervor.^[Kling,  [New Divinity](https://www.notion.so/keelan/The-New-Divinity-and-the-Origins-of-the-American-Board-of-Commissioners-of-Foreign-Missions-f4fab75d89dc4a7d8915b5bffa8d787f#66b85365c4af49db8dcdbc0e93c5064a), Loc. 160.  _NEED TO SEE HIS FOOTNOTE FOR THIS STATEMENT. SURELY HE GOES INTO DETAIL ABOUT SOURCES WHEN MAKING SUCH A CLAIM._]

Samuel Hopkins, for instance, was one of Edwards closest companions and disciples. Hopkins too was convinced of the imminent dawn of the millennium through the spread of the gospel. (_CONSIDER CITING HOPKINS DIRECTLY_) De Jong writes, "For Hopkins missions would bring the millennium and the millennium would be characterized by heightened mission work."^[De Jong, As the Waters, 208.]

This activist understanding of millennialism relied on human initiative to usher in the millennium, as opposed to either natural catastrophes or other impersonal events. Edwards was one of the first in the colonies to base millennial advance on human initiative, and the characteristic was continued through the influence of New Divinity men.^[Davidson, Logic, 270.] It would be the sacrificial spread of the gospel throughout the entire world that would finally bring to fruition the new kingdom of God.^[De Jong, As the Waters, 211.]

By the second half of the eighteenth century, human activity under the providence of God became the agent through which the millennial kingdom would arrive; however, this activity was centered around the spread of the gospel, as opposed to other social means, to Christianize the world in preparation for the coming kingdom.

`ADD PARAGRAPH 
that notes the work of Ruth Boch, Visionary Republic, and her central thesis.In this paragraph, note her central thesis.Also point out that it was millennialism jumbled into pre-post confusion at this time._`

Many American Protestants entered the revolutionary period longing to see the hand of providence orchestrating their millennial vision. Kling writes, "America's revolutionary and postrevolutionary period (1776-1800) - a dramatic time indeed - unleashed a torrent of millennialist predictions, some premillennial, others postmillennial."^[Kling, New Divinity, Loc. 316.]

For many, America's short history proved fertile ground for millennial speculation. The establishment of the new world was, itself, seen as a sign of divine providence. In the wake of the war, American Protestants possessed the common sentiment that the results of the war were in fact a significant eschatological development. De Jong writes, "Their country was regarded as the potential seat of Christ's rule in that era, and evangelicals were compared with Cromwell's Roundheads for their consciousness of being divine instruments in realizing that day."^[De Jong, As the Waters, 201-202.] American Protestants increasingly claimed a unique and elevated role in hastening the millennium.

Already optimistic concerning the global spread of the gospel, Protestants in America were increasingly certain the millennium was fast approaching. Kling writes, "However, as revivals of the Second Great Awakening (ca. 1790-1835) advanced in both intensity and duration, a confidence grew that the millennium was an approaching reality. The apocalyptic element of millennial thought, which was associated with the destruction of the world prior to Christ's return, gave way to more hopeful millennial expectations."^[Kling, New Divinity, Loc. 316.]

This optimism weighted opinions concerning the millennium toward a postmillennial perspective. Davidson writes,

> "Postmillennialism thus came into its own only when divines consciously argued that Christ's figurative millennial reign demanded human action; that natural catastrophes were inappropriate means of providential accomplishments in such a scenario; and that, consequently, history was to be seen as a series of gradual, progressive steps toward this-wordly perfection."^[Davidson, 262.]

Through the influence of the divines during the eigtheenth century, American Protestantism widely embraced millennialism as the optimistic end for which the church must expend its resources and effort.

## Development During the 1800s
The first half of the nineteenth century proved a fertile period in American history for millennial speculation. As Earnest Sandeen writes, "America in the early nineteenth century was drunk on the millennium. whether in support of optimism or pessimism, radicalism or conservatism, Americans seemed unable to avoid- seemed bound to utilize-the vocabulary of eschatology."^[Sandeen, Roots, 42.]

Indeed, millennial interest was part of the vernacular during the era. Though having very different concepts of how it would occur, men like William Miller and Alexander Campbell stressed the importance, and even immanence, of the millennium. Miller went so far as to predict that the millennium would begin before the middle of the nineteenth century, and he was not alone in his confidence. During this era in American Protestant history, the group commonly referred to as Shakers during this era were officially the Millennial Church of the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing and believed the second advent had already occurred.^[Sandeen, Roots, 48-49. `Find Edward Demming Andrews, The People Called Shakers (New York, 1963).`]

Shakers were not alone in this belief, as other sects of Protestant Christianity in America held similar views.^[Sandeen, Roots, 49. `Need to pull out original sources on the Oneida Community, and maybe some others if possible. List here a couple of groups that held this view with a brief sentence on what they believed. J.H. Noyes, Confession of Religious Experience, Oneida Reserve, 1849, is an excellent quote talking about how pervasive the crazy views were, and how these people got swept up into it. I need to pull the quote found in Sandeen on page 49.`]

In addition, the Mormon church was established with an intense interest in establishing the kingdom, their move to Utah essentially being a literal attempt at building it.^[Sandeen, Roots, 47-49 `Find a better source.`]

The nineteenth century was ripe for eschatological dialogue.

`Summary at the end of this paragraph with the guy Sandeen quotes giving a confession of the fervor. Find him in footnote 6.`

During the first half of the century, a more recognizable divide between a pre- and postmillennialism emerged, with the former pessimistic about the direction of society and the latter increasingly optimistic that the American experiment was also a kingdom enterprise.^[Davidson, Logic, 260.]

As Handy notes, millennial approaches spread across a spectrum, from purely literal interpretations of apocalyptic literature to completely spiritualized or allegorized interpretations. For some, it was only the physical, miraculous return of Christ that could usher in any kind of millennial kingdom. For others, and increasingly for the major Protestant American denominations, it was "the climax of the Christianization of civilization, fulfilling history."^[Handy, A Christian America, 30.]

Kling writes, "By 1810, after nearly two decades of revivals, evangelicals faced the future with considerably more confidence than they did in 1790."^[Kling, New Divinity, Loc. 201.]

This optimism led to confidence in the ability of Protestants to truly Christianize society, even on a global scale. With the establishment of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (ABCFM), this growing postmillennial optimism was on full display. The first annual report of the claims, "The long expected day is approaching. The Lord is shaking the nations; his friends in different parts of christendom [sic] are roused from their slumbers; and unprecedented exertions are making for the spread of divine knowledge, and the conversion of the nations."^['Minutes of the First Annual Meeting,' in First Ten Annual Reports of the American Board of Commissions of Foreign Missions, With Documents of the Board, 13.]

With postmillennial optimism on the rise and the failure of the Millerite predictions concerning the second advent in the 1840s, premillennialist groups anticipating the physical return of Christ made easy targets for caricature and the view came under increasing scrutiny. A flurry of activity occurred in the years preceding the Millerite prediction. Miller himself began to feel he was the leader of a movement.^[Nichol, Francis D. The Midnight Cry: A Defense of the Character and Conduct of William Miller and the Millerites, Who Mistakenly Believed That the Second Coming of Christ Would Take Place in the Year 1844. Vol. Reproduction. Brushton, New York: TEACH Services, Inc., 2000. Page 80.]

Conferences on the second coming of Christ began in 1840.^[Himes, J. V. “A General Conference on the Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ.” Signs of the Times 1.11 (1840): 84.]

As these conferences gained momentum, churches from across denominations began to coalesce into a parallel Millerite coalition that looked much like a denomination itself. The group began to publish its own newspaper and developed their own hymnal.^[See Joshua Vaughan Himes, Millennial Harp: Designed for Meetings on the Second Coming of Christ (Boston: J.V. Himes, 1843) as well as Himes, Signs of the Times.]

With the supposed event drawing close, pressure mounted and many of the leaders of the movement were removed from their respective denominations. Sandeen writes, "But on 22 October 1844 the sun sank as it had on every other day since creation, and Christ had not come. In retrospect the Millerite movement appears to have virtually destroyed premillennialism in America for a generation."^[Sandeen, Roots, 54.]

As premillennialism lost favor, postmillennial optimism grew with adherence to the latter eventually eclipsing the former.

Those still maintaining a premillennialist commitment moved into the margins of Protestant thought. Preaching before a gathering of the First Synod of New Jersey in 1849, Presbyterian minister Charles Imbrie pleaded for the church not be swayed by the majority thinking concerning postmillennialism and used his address to expound differences between the competing views. Imbrie recognizes the similarities shared by the divergent millennial views in the beginning, moving on to note disparities and their significance to missions. Of chief concern to Imbrie are the postmillennial assertions of a spiritual kingdom instead of the physical return of Christ and the optimistic means through which this will occur. Imbrie writes, "In some day when the gospel shall be proclaimed, it will not, as now, bring in only a part, but will convert every hearer. A new law of success is suddenly to arise, and the church is gradually, or towards the last perhaps, more rapidly, to be transfused into the millennial state."^[Imbrie, Charles K. Kingdom of God: A Discourse Preached Before the Synod of New Jersey, October 17, 1849. New York: Franklin Knight, 1850.]

Nevertheless, Imbrie's address takes the form of a plea, as he admits postmillennialism to be the pervading view of the era.^[Imbrie, 51.]

In fact, the postmillennial vision of Christianizing the social order in order to usher in the millennium gained so much traction that its social influence was eventually assumed across the spectrum of millennial views. Handy writes, "Even those who stressed premillinnialist or millenarian views, however, often saw the work of Christianizing society as a preparation for the coming of the Lord."^[Handy, A Christian America, 31.] For many, the idea of creating a Christian society was attainable after decades of revivals and Protestant expansion across the growing frontier. This optimism coincided with the malaise produced by the miscalculations of Millerites and other premillennial groups, pushing the mainstream of American Protestantism toward postmillennial convictions. Handy continues, "For them, the religious quest and the civil process, though clearly distinct, moved toward the same happy climax."^[Handy, A Christian America, 31.] By the middle of the century, however, the distinction between civilizing and Christianizing began to diminish as the two ideas merged into a overarching mission for Protestant America.

The first half of the nineteenth century witnessed the crystallization of a majority Protestant view in favor of postmillennialism. Davidson writes, ""By the 1820s the perspective had changed considerably. Postmillennialism had become a well- established, coherent position..."^[Davidson, 270.] The events that transpired over the course of the century only increased the dominance of the postmillennial position. By the last half of the century, postmillennialism was assumed for most Protestants, reaching the level of a theological presupposition upon which rested the applied theology of the era. This dominance gave Brown the confidence to write only a few decades later of how the majority of the Church, "looks for a future period of prosperity, preceding the second advent of Christ."^[Brown, Millennium, Dictionary, 373.] Though only one of many presuppositions, postmillennialism shaded both the theological questions and answers as the Gilded Age and Progressive Era approached.

# Presupposition 2: A Conditional Manifest Destiny: American Protestant Kingdom Theology
On a winter day in December, 1870, students entered a lecture hall at Andover Theological Seminary to hear a series of lectures by Samuel Harris, then president of Bowdoin College. This lecture series would later be published as a book under the title, The Kingdom of Christ on Earth. If postmillennialism addressed the manner in which this kingdom would come, then kingdom theology provided an understanding of its nature and means. As the Gilded Age gained steam, postmillennial optimism and European influence fueld a renewed zeal in the kingdom of God, a factor that would weigh heavy in the formation of applied theology and missionary methods toward immigrants in the decades to come.

Near the beginning of his first lecture, Harris sets the tone and trajectory, claiming:

> This interest in Jesus is not speculative, but practical, pertaining to him as the world's Redeemer and King. The idea of his kingdom on earth, and the expectation of its progress and triumph in fulfillment of the prophecy and promise of the gospel, have become familiar elements of human thought and determinant forces in human action. The sublime idea of the conversion of the world to Christ has become so common as to cease to awaken wonder. Its realization is the object throughout Christendom of systematic, persistent, and energetic action, and elicits every year heroic consecration and self-sacrifice. The prayer, “Thy kingdom come,” is perpetually offered.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 2.]

In these opening remarks, Harris makes several significant assertions about the kingdom of God. He states that the conversion of the world is the aim of the kingdom and that these are the purposes for which missionary activity and human effort are working. Furthermore, he notes that this view had become "so common as to cease to awaken wonder."^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 2.] In the remaining twelve lectures, Harris lays out the end and means of the kingdom of God, a whole world turned into a Christian society through the efforts of Christian ministry and missionary enterprise.

Harris was a prolific figure at the close of the nineteenth century. A graduate of Bowdoin College and Andover Seminary, at the time of these lectures he served as the president of the former and now guest lectured at the latter. A theologian by training, Harris would serve the bulk of his career as the Dwight Professor of Systematic Theology at Yale, filling the role for 25 years.^[Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 82.] Harris wrote several works of theology, but the kingdom lectures at Andover provide his most comprehensive work on the kingdom of God and constitute an exhaustive treatment of both pure and applied theological exhortations to the students at the seminary.

If the orator of these lectures was notable, the setting was perhaps more so. Founded in 1808 as a result of theological downgrade at Harvard due to encroaching Unitarianism, Andover Theological Seminary played a major role in the development of American Protestant thought.^[Caldwell, New England's New Divinity and the Age of Judson's Preparation, 31. Though, there has to be a more direct source for this one!] The school was birthed out of a desire to maintain orthodox doctrine, and like so many other aspects of American Protestantism, the pervasive influence of Jonathan Edwards could be felt in the establishment of Andover. Various connections to New Divinity thought existed in many of the founding figures, such as Leonard Woods, Moses Stuart, and Edward Dorr Griffin, ensuring those taught at Andover would be no strangers to the concepts of postmillennialism.^[Caldwell, New England's New Divinity, 38.]

Andover Seminary was the first graduate seminary founded in North America, and it went on to train many of the nation's ministers and missionaries over the next century. Leonard Woods, who held the Abbott Professorship of Christian Theology, writes in his  _History of the Andover Theological Seminary_, "For ten years all who were sent out by the American Board, except one, were educated here. And in thirty eight years, above a hundred went from this Theological School [sic] to preach the gospel to the unevangelized."^[Woods, History of Andover, 199-200.] In this setting, Samuel Harris, himself, had received a portion of his formative theological training. 

Furthermore, in 1870 Andover had a made a name for itself among Protestant Americans and largely enjoyed a reputation of excellence.^[`FIND POTENTIAL CITATON`] Like the rest of Protestant America, Andover would soon see conflict concerning theological convictions. A mere decade after Harris delivered his lectures on the kingdom of God, the Andover Controversy would begin to take shape. A rift developed between those would hold the seminary to its founding doctrines and a new class of faculty that wanted to promote "Progressive Orthodoxy" that imbibed evolutionary thought and exalted human progress as a central tenant of the gospel.^[Whitlock, L. G., Jr. “Andover Controversy.” Evangelical Dictionary of Theology, 59. `Do I find a way here to point back to Woods' prophetic warnings about the orthodoxy of the institution? Do I save that for a chapter on the influence of Social Sciences and evolutionary thought? Since this chapter section is about kingdom theology, perhaps that waits for a further explanation elsewhere.`] In this regard, Andover's own conflict served as a microcosm of shifts in Protestant thought during the Gilded Age. Harris's lectures, in many ways, foreshadow much of the later development in the coming decades.

Harris's kingdom lectures serve as a prime example concerning theological presuppositions that would give birth to a particular applied theology and eventual missionary methods toward immigrants. In the beginning years of the Gilded Age, Harris stood before a room full of the very men who would lead churches into the Progressive Era in American history. Immigration to the United States had peaked before, but in the coming decades America would see a surge of immigrants unlike any previous moment in its history. The topic of these lectures was by no means inconsequential. As discussed above, postmillennialism had risen to the level of theological presupposition among American Protestants at the end of the nineteenth century, a point Harris proves at length in his lectures. However, a commitment to postmillennialism naturally leads to concern for the nature and means of the kingdom that stands as the object of this eschatological hope. Harris dedicates twelve lectures to just that topic.

## A Preoccupation with the Kingdom
As with millennial speculation, talk of the kingdom was a frequent occurrence during the last half of the nineteenth century.^[Evans, Social Gospel in American Religion, 6, 60. See also Handy, A Christian America, 87.] In his opening remarks, Harris points to the regularity with which the kingdom was addressed, saying, "The idea of his kingdom on earth, and the expectation of its progress and triumph in fulfillment of the prophecy and promise of the gospel, have become familiar elements of human thought..."^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 2.] The kingdom was truly a favorite topic of conversation, and with postmillennial optimism as the mainstream, questions of progress and triumph were central to the concerns of Gilded Age kingdom theology. Belief that Americans were living at the dawn of the kingdom of Christ on earth incited much discussion about the nature and means of that kingdom and became the foundation for the development of particular missionary methods in the decades to come.

Talk of the millennium required talk of the kingdom of God in some sense. The very same periodicals filled with millennial speculation necessarily had to speak of its nature.^[See Millennial Habringer. `AND FIND OTHERS... there were several examples with millennial even in the title`] This was true regardless of one's stance on the millennium, whether premillennial or postmillennial. However, the ideas concerning the kingdom and how it was to come about varied greatly depending on one's convictions concerning the timing of the millennium.^[Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 34-35.] While adherents to premilliennial eschatology were generally pessimistic regarding the trajectory of society, the majority American Protestant commitment toward postmillennialism lended naturally toward a progressive, optimistic kingdom theology.^[Danner, Dan G. (1999)]

A generation prior to the Gilded Age, Alexander Campbell demonstrated the natural relationship between millennialism and a progressive kingdom theology. Speaking to Campbell's conception of the kingdom, Danner writes, "For Campbell, the world was getting better; scriptures were being spread; science, education, agriculture, commerce, and nature all were combining to bring on a better day. A new political, moral, and religious revolution was fast advancing..."^[Danner, Dan G. (1999)] In the introductory prospectus to his journal,  _The Millennial Harbringer_, Campbell provides his purpose for starting it. He writes, "It shall have for its object the developement [sic], and introduction of that political and religious order of society called THE MILLENNIUM [sic], which will be the consummation of that ultimate amelioration of society proposed in the Christian Scriptures."^[Campbell, Alexander, and Charles Louis Loos. The Millennial Harbinger. Bethany, VA: W.K. Pendleton, 1830, xv.] In his writings, Campbell was as concerned about espousing a theology of the kingdom as he was on persuading toward a particular timeline for the millennium. Tuveson notes that Campbell went further than most millennialist in his time by transferring the focus of redemption onto the world rather than the individual.^[Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 81.] In this regard, Campbell's understanding of the kingdom was a precursor to the view that would become popular after Harris at the turn of the century.

The reverse concern was also true. For Harris to promote his view of the kingdom, it required a postmillennial commitment. We see this in the prominence he gives to defending the postmillennial position. In the introduction to his defense of postmillennialism, Harris writes, "The millenarian [premillennial] error is essentially this : The dispensation of the Spirit under which we live is not intended to secure the gradual extension and ultimate triumph of the kingdom; the preaching of the gospel to every creature is not intended to convert the world , but to be a witness to all nations.."^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 220.] In essence, Harris claims the primary foible of the millenarian position is that it does not adhere to the vision of kingdom theology he espouses. The majority American Protestant understanding of postmillennialism and a kingdom theology that was progressive and optimistic were intrinsically linked; however, they were not the same doctrine.

Despite the large amount of overlapping territory between the doctrine of the millennium and the doctrine of the kingdom, sufficient distinction exists to consider them separate aspects of a system. Postmillennialism and the kingdom of God accomplished different but complimentary roles in a holistic view of eschatology, and hence of mission, for the majority view among Protestant Americans. Kingdom theology essentially filled in the container provided by postmillennialism. If the latter provided a telos, or end goal, then the former filled in the details of that goal. The kingdom of God spoke to the nature of their goal, what they were working to achieve, and the means to their goal, through what kind of initiative it could be accomplished. This eschatological system, comprised of mutually reinforcing commitments to postmillennialism and a particular theology of the kingdom, played a major role in shaping the applied theology for mission.^[Handy, A Christian America, 85 notes this connection in Harris concerning the kingdom and his millennial expectations, and he also underscores the significance of postmillennialism for the broader Protestant American wordlview.]

Over the course of his twelve lectures, Harris interacts with the kingdom of God from every conceivable angle. In his first lectures, he demonstrates proofs for the existence of the kingdom and antagonism toward the kingdom as Satanic forces.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 1,22. Consider adding lecture names to the footnotes.] He continues by describing the unique virtues of the kingdom (lecture 3), bound up in sacrificial love (lecture 7).^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 47, 129.] He outlines the necessity of both divine (lecture 4) and human agency (lecture 6) in the triumph of the kingdom.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 65, 110.] In lecture 11, Harris pits the "scriptural doctrine of the triumph of Christ's kingdom" against millenarianism, forcefully defending the doctrine of postmillennialism.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 220.] Finally, Harris addresses the relationship between human progress, civilization, and the kingdom of God in lectures 10 and 12.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 199, 238.] In total, the Harris's lectures provide a fully comprehensive theology of the kingdom that serves, in many ways, as a bridge between more traditional understandings of the kingdom of God and a developing understanding, largely influenced by European thought, that would ground much of the applied theology by Protestants for the next four decades.

`Note:  
May need to quote the dialectical bridge language here... or at least give it a footnote on something I've alread said.
He was moreover to be a link between the "dialectical" theology and the "modern," which stresses action over systematic completeness.^[ Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 82.]`

## The European Conversation
As with postmillennialism, many other aspects of American Protestant theology were developed in conversation with concurrent discussions in Western Europe, especially Great Brittain. Kingdom theology was no exception. American thoughts on the kingdom of God were heavily influenced by those in Europe, and reliance on certain scholars is evident.

F.D. Maurice is one such scholar whose theology played an outsized role in what became the majority understanding of the kingdom in American Protestantism at the turn of the century. One of the more prominent theologians in the Church of England during his time, Maurice was both a committed progressive postimillennialist and had much to say about the kingdom as a result.^[Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 75.] Maurice is perhaps best known for his role in the development of Christian Socialism in Europe, which eventually emerged in its American form as Social Christianity.

Maurice's work gave rise to Christian Socialism in the 1840s and 1850s in England. His work was accompanied by the writings and sermons of others such as John Malcom Forbes and Frederick Robertson during those decades. However, a second wave of scholarship in the 1880s expanded on the concepts of Christian Socialism.^[Phillip, A Kingdom on Earth, xiv.]

Maurice's initial work on the topic,  _Kingdom of Christ_, was published in 1838 and the result of a series of Anglican tracts written to dialogue with Quakers. In it, Maurice laid out several significant theological concepts concerning the Kingdom of God. He believed that the New Jerusalem was, in fact, realizable. Speaking of Maurice, Phillips writes,

> The Kingdom was the community of righteousness about to be established upon earth.  It was not an idealized target never fully to be attained in this life but rather a real, living, and fully functioning community that would be realized through the social application of Christ's teachings.  According to Social Christians, the historical completion of the Christianizing of communities was imminent. It was the expression of God's mission to humanity, the fulfillment of the Incarnation.'^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 1.]

For Maurice, the social perfection of the kingdom was an attainable goal, and one that could be accomplished though socially attainable means.

`Paragraph: 
Quotes from Maurice demonstrating the above paragraph.I probably need to grab some original source quotes from Maurice's book. If I need to, I can find page numbers in Phillips to do so.`

Though Maurice died in 1872, his legacy of Christian Socialism thrived into the 1880s in Britain. It was during this time that the movement gained the most momentum. Those involved in this fresh expression of Christian Socialism saw themselves as the heirs of Maurice's legacy.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, xxv. `I need some kind of explainer footnote here.`] Phillips writes about the era,

> The mixture of secular social conscience and Social Christianity was present both in Britain and America at this time. The spark that initiated so much concern and activity on behalf of the distressed, laboring masses is still not clear. But the impulse unleashed both Social Christianity and general political and social reformism for decades to come.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, xxiv.]

As noted by Phillips, this movement would also make an impression on American Protestant thought concerning the kingdom of God.

Christian Socialism in England was not the only influence on kingdom theology coming from Europe. German scholarship during the era also played a significant role in the formation of the American Protestant vision for the kingdom of God. The most significant voices coming from Germany were those of Alrbecht Ritschl and Adolf von Harnack.^[Evans, The Social Gospel in American Religion, 60. See also Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 11 and Handy, A Christian America, 87.] In 1898, Stuckenberg writes,

> To Ritschl belongs the credit for giving prominence to the kingdom of God, which had long been neglected by theologians. The prominence given to this subject almost warrants us in calling his system the theology of the kingdom.^[Stuckenberg, 286.]

Ritschl (1822-89) taught systematic theology at Göttingen, influencing many subsequent scholars in the German Protestant academy. Of those influenced by Ritschl, Rudolf Hermann Lotze and Adolf von Harnack also made significant contributions to this developing theology of the kingdom. Each of these three men taught a relatively large number of Americans coming to Germany for graduate studies.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 11.]

Ritschl's school of thought was essentially a rejection of Hegelian rationalism.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 11.] In his early instruction, Ritschl was heavily influence by the Tubingen school, studying under Baur, but his tenure in this school of thought was short lived. Becoming convinced their basis in speculation was false, he refuted their position in his own scholarship.^[Stuckenberg, J. H. W. “The Theology of Albrecht Ritschl.” The American Journal of Theology 2.2 (1898): 271.] Instead, Ritschl stressed a more immanent, experiential, and pragmatic concept of Christianity. Much like Schleiermacher before him, Ritschl placed weight on religious experience as the test of Christianity's authenticity.^[Evans, Social Gospel in American Religion, 60.] Furthermore, he rejected any attempts at rationalistic proofs of Christianity.^[`FIND THE RIGHT SOURCE FOR THIS.`] These convictions led Ritschl and his associates to focus on ethical and moral experience in their understanding of theology in general the kingdom of God in specific.

The result of Ritschl's thought was a total reconstruction of orthodox doctrines of Christology, soteriology, ecclesiology, anthropology, and ultimately eschatology. Ritschl redefines the divine relationship of Christ to God the Father as one not of substance but disposition.^[Stuckenberg, 278.] In this way, Christ's position as the one to usher in the kingdom makes him unique, but his moral character is attainable by all humanity and all can obtain this same kind of divinity.^[Stuckenberg, 279.] Ritschl denies original sin, claiming that our nature does not make sin inevitable.^[Stuckenberg, 284.] Therefore, the doctrine of atonement is no longer necessary.^[Stuckenberg, 280.] Though sin is not inherited, it appears universal. Humanity's real problem is ignorance of the good. In this way, the kingdom of sin reigns. Christ, in his selflfessness reveals a better way, and humanity's salvation is found in their selfless subjugation of their will to the divine will. In this way can humanity usher in the kingdom of God.^[Stuckenberg, 284.]

The pinnacle of Ritschl's theology is found in his conception of the kingdom of God. The kingdom is the highest good; the hub around which the spokes of Ritshl's theology are anchored. The kingdom is not the church, though both are necessary. Each occupies a different sphere for Ritschl, and each has disctinct functions. The church is the sphere of worship, while the kingdom is the sphere of Christian moral action.^[Stuckenberg, 288.]

`I still need direct quotes from Ritschl. I can get those out of Stuckenberg. But, I also need to sprinkle in other sources on Ritschl's theology.`

Building off of Ritschl's thought, von Harnack made a lasting impact on Protestant conceptions of the early Christian church. Harnack, like many other liberal German theologians of the era, was convinced the essence of Christianty was to be found in the teachings of Jesus and that the later teachings of the New Testament had reinterpreted these. Von Harnack warned against an overemphasis by the Western church on the teachings of Paul and created a wedge between the earlier teachings of Jesus and the later teachings of Paul.^[Evans, Social Gospel in American Religion, 61.] As Evans writes,

> Both Ritschl and von Harnack's understanding of Christianity shifted the interpretation of the New Testament away from an otherworldly understanding of Jesus's message. instead emphasizing the significance of his teachings the realization of a new kingdom in this world.^[Evans, Social Gospel in American Religion, 61.]

In the Ritschlian school, American Protestants would find a theological foundation for a kingdom of God that was entirely immanent, and a means of securing it through ethical and social activity.

## An American Adaptation
An ocean away, Protestant ministers and theologians in the United States were in the midst a similar conversations concerning the nature and means of the kingdom. While it must be noted that cultural and circumstantial similarities existed between European and American Protestants, it is insufficient to assign coincidence as the driving force behind the concurrence of dialog about kingdom theology. These were not two separate but coincidental developments. A history of shared interaction on the nature of means of the kingdom demonstrates an American reliance on the European conversation.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, xxvi, 19, repeatedly references correspondence with or citation of European theologians concerning issues of social Christianity. On page 11, Phillips notes that many Americans went to Germany to study directly under Ritschl and von Harnack. See also Handy, A Christian America, 87, where he notes the number of Americans who studied in Germany under these men and Handy, Undermined Establishment, 59, where he generally asserts a strong reliance by American Protestants on Christian Socialism from England in developing the American Protestant versions of social Christianity.] A brief examination demonstrates the relationship between European scholarship and presuppositions developing in the United States among Protestants concerning the kingdom of God. As noted above, the majority of American Protestants were increasingly committed to a postmillennial eschatology. This prior commitment proved fertile ground for an optimistic and immanent vision of the kingdom that could be established through human initiative.

Though American Protestants were less likely to use the term Christian Socialist, the ideas of F.D. Maurice plainly influenced the development of kingdom theology in the United States. A clear reliance on Maurice is evident for some of the most influential American Protestants during the end of the nineteenth century. Richard Ely, an Episcopal lay leader and economist, made a tremendous impact on the spread of social Christianity, and like many others, Ely was influenced by the parallel movement occurring in England.^[Handy, Undermined Establishment, 61-62.] Washington Gladden, labeled by many as the father of the American Social Gospel movement, wrote of Maurice, "They gentleness hath made me great."^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 18.  `Find original source in Phillips.`]

Perhaps none are so clearly tied to Maurice's influence though as Horace Bushnell, the noted Congregational minister and theologian. Bushnell shared Maurice's optimism concerning humanity, and believed morality was the result of social evolution.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 5.] Like Maurice, Bushnell was a polarizing and often controversial figure. Phillips notes that both Maurice and Horace Bushnell were the targets of a good bit of controversy in their own generation, but both men seemed to enjoy a subsequent admiration of their thought in later decades. By the end of the nineteenth century, the Protestant mainstream more readily accepted their concepts concerning progress and the kingdom.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 4-6.] While the influence of both had a liberalizing tendency on Protestantism, most who advocated for Bushnell, or Maurice did not claim to be liberal Protestants. Their appeal was broader than purely liberal corners of Protestantism, and their ideas pervaded in the fabric of developing theology on the kingdom of God.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 6, notes that many would defend Bushnell's conservative roots in order to advocate for his positions.]

Much like Maurice and the Christian Socialists of Britain, Ritschl's kingdom theology left it's mark in the United States. Evans writes, "One particular concept that would increasingly fascinate American Protestants was Ritschl's stress on the kingdom of God as a means of understanding the historical mission of Christianity as a religious movement."^[Evans, Social Gospel in America, 60.] Ritschl's ideas were especially significant among American liberals. Hutchison claims Ritschl was the primary player in German influence on American Protestant theology after 1890.^[Hutchison, The Modernist Impulse in American Protestantism, 122-32.  `Find the exact page... after you find the source!`] By the time the social gospel emerged as a full-blown movement, almost all of its leaders had leaned on Ritschl for aspects of their theology.^[Evans, Social Gospel in America, 61.] However, the effects of Ritschl on American kingdom theology surface both earlier and broader than the social gospel movement.

The widespread commitment to postmillennialism proved fertile ground for Ritschl's kingdom theology. Ritchl's explanation of the kingdom nested nicely into the framework of an immanently approaching millennium. If American Protestants were tasked with ushering in the kingdom, then Ritschl gave shape to this idea for many, even if they did not know the concepts were gleaned from German liberal theology. As the nineteenth century moved through its final decades, many found appealing Ritschl's propensity for linking religion and civilization as twins engines of progress and advancing the kingdom.^[Handy, A Christian America, 87.] Handy notes that even as the emerging liberal segments within evangelicalism were elevating Ritschl's concepts of the kingdom to a central place in their own theology, they were doing so in broad language that could, and would, be easily accepted by a much wider spectrum Protestants.^[Handy, A Christian America, 87.]

Samuel Harris is one such example. Handy writes, "Such men as Harris and others like him were not crusading for liberalism but were trying to state views that represented an evangelical consensus."

Handy, A Christian America, 87.

Evangelicals across a broad spectrum in America were gaining interest in the doctrine of the kingdom of God, because certain kingdom theologies provided a pathway for the discussion of the church's role in civilization.

Handy, A Christian America, 84, 87.

Harris writes,

> The idea of a kingdom of God on earth and the prophecy of its realization are present in modern thought and among the forces that determine modern progress and civilization. The idea is so complete as a solution of the problem of man’s history and destiny, so sufficient, if realized, to constitute the perfection and blessedness of society, and as a conception of the ways of God with man so comprehensive and sublime, that in itself it demonstrates that it is from God.
> 
> Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 18.

Harris himself was a committed postmillennialist and he spoke confidently of the complete Christianization of society.

Handy, A Christian America, 86.

Though not directly promoting a theologically liberal Protestant vision, Harris was nevertheless influenced by key aspects of European liberal theology on the nature and means of the kingdom. Tuveson writes of Harris, "He was moreover to be a link between the "dialectical" theology and the "modern," which stresses action over systematic completeness."

Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 82

Handy notes a dependence by Harris on Bushnell, which exhibited a heavy reliance on Maurice and Christian Socialism.

Handy, A Christian America, 85.

Furthermore, Harris's kingdom lectures demonstrate a reliance on theological concepts popularized through the work of Ritschl and von Harnack. Even if Harris would reject many of Ritschl's claims on doctrines such as the nature of Christ and the need for atonement, he was conversant in Ritschl's kingdom language. Throughout his kingdom lectures, Harris borrows on the kingdom shorthand coined by von Harnack concerning the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man.

Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 2, 13.

In his introductory lecture, Harris makes the claim:

> Besides this direct interest in the conversion of the world, modern civilization is characterized by ideas derived from the gospel of the kingdom; the brotherhood of man and the fatherhood of God; philanthropy; the promise of human progress; the rights of man; the removal of oppression; the reign of justice and love displacing the reign of force.
> 
> Harris, A Kingdom on Earth, 2.

For this understanding, Harris and other American Protestants were indebted to Ritschl and von Harnack.

**The Result: A Social Christianity?**

Unlike England and other regions of Europe, the term Christian Socialist was not widely and consistently received in the United States. Initially intended by Maurice as a specifically religious moniker, as opposed to creating ties toward a political philosophy, he eventually refuted the term himself. In the United States, the term fell largely out of favor with the majority of Protestants and became associated with a more radical fringe and carried a hint of militancy.

Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, xvi

Instead, the term social Christianity gained favor around the year 1880 and enjoyed increased usage through the turn of the century.

`Do I cite NGram here? If so, how?`

In  _The Social Gospel in America, 1870-1920_, Handy writes:

> ... the designation most widely used was "social Christianity." The new term came to be applied chiefly to a particular kind of protestant social concern. There was, on the one hand, a social Christianity which was cast in a "conservative mold." Its exponents recognized social problems but sought to deal with them without sharply challenging the dominant individualism... At the other extreme were those who tended to reject existing social and economic institutions in favor of sweeping reconstruction.
> 
> Handy, The Social Gospel in America, 5.

After the turn of the century, social gospel would increasingly become a watchword, and by the 1920s it would strain the fabric of Protestant America. However, the concepts of social Christianity were prior to and broader than the social gospel movement that it would produce and served as an umbrella for Protestant social concern. By the 1890s, Social Christianity played a significant role in the life of most major Protestant denominations.

Handy, Undermined Establishment, 58-59.

Though many American Protestants were swept up into progressive politics, and the movement itself mostly consisted of evangelical Protestants, not all who were influence by social Christian concepts could be label political progressives. The idea of social Christianity was even broader still.

Handy, Undermined Establishment, 104.

In the decades prior to the turn of the century, the question was not primarily one of theological liberalism or conservatism as it would later become. In  _Protestant Churches and Industrial America_, Henry May provides a nuanced framework that explains the multivalenct nature of social Christianity. May writes,

> Naturally, preachers of social Christianity spoke in different terms, influenced by various theologies, reaching different diagnoses for the ills of society. They shared, however, two characteristics: all were moved by a sense of social crisis, and all believed in the necessity and possibility of a Christian solution."
> 
> May, Protestant Church and Industrial America, 163.

The social Christian movement, as defined by May, contained three primary strands: conservative, progressive, and radical social Christianity during the end of the nineteenth century.

May's categories do not align neatly with theological distinctions, even during the era in discussion. Handy notes, however, that May's conservative strand of social Christianity consisted of churches and individuals who continued to identify as conservative evangelical Protestants. Most of these stayed within their existing denominational framework, and supported socially oriented home missions and rescue mission efforts.

Handy, Undermined Establishment, 105. See also May, Protestant Churches and Industrial America, 163-169 and Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, xvii.

The radical strand was essentially a fringe, largely rejected by American Protestants, who were proponents of radical restructuring and socialist positions. The middle, or progressive strand, essentially became the social gospel movement of later decades.

May, Protestant Churches and Industrial America, 170-181.

Despite the problems inherent in classifying the spectrum of approaches to social Christianity, May's framework demonstrates a narrow or fringe understanding of social Christianity does not represent the extent to which issues of social concern and activity became embedded in the Protestant conversation of the church's mission. At the end of the nineteenth century, most Protestant Americans knew it was their job to do something to shape the course of human civilization.

From the 1880s onward, social Christianity worked its way into the fabric of American Protestantism and shaped the contours of Christian mission. Relating this to kingdom theology, Handy writes,

> The kingdom idea was in many respects a spiritualized and idealized restatement of the search for a specifically Christian society in an age of freedom and progress. Protestants with somewhat different theological perspectives concerning the kingdom of God could nevertheless find sufficient in common to work together for its coming.
> 
> Handy, A Christian America, 87.

Since it was too soon to speak of a liberal and evangelical divide, we see broad tenets of social Christianity developing into a presupposition for most American Protestants. The uptick in social Christianity during the era was a major factor in the way churches related to the state. There was an increased sense of significance among American Protestant church people concerning public issues that make this period in church history unique.

Handy, Undermined Establishment, 10.

Even those that May would list as conservative evangelical members of the social Christian movement claimed hopes at the Christianization of America.

May, Protestant Churches and Industrial America, 165, details the positions of Joseph Cook, who popularized the phrase,

Furthermore, the Americanization of Christianity was of concern to both conservative evangelicals and adherents of the social gospel alike.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE5MDExMTUwNTIsMTQ1NTAyNzcwMiw3Mz
Q5ODI4OTgsMTgzMDMwNzY0Ml19
-->