
﻿
# IND9400 Paper
13th June 2020 at 7:25pm

## Introduction
Eschatology births missiology. Certainly Kahler's statement, as quoted by Bosch, rings true that mission is the mother of theology. However, even Bosch continues by citing Kasemann's claim that apocalyptic serves as the headwaters of theology in the New Testament. Bosch concludes these two ideas–mission and apocalyptic–are complementary.^[Bosch, Transforming Mission, 2 and Endnote 1] Eschatology and missiology stand in unique relationship one to another. One's eschatology provides shape and direction to missions, while one's missiology provides response to convictions concerning the ultimate telos of creation. Walls rightly summarizes this connection, stating, "Eschatology is where theology meets history most intimately, since it is concerned with history’s end and meaning."[^2]
 
An eschatological thread can be traced throughout the entire modern missions movements. Stanely writes, "From the genesis of the evangelical Protestant missionary movement in the mid-eighteenth century supporters of Christian missions had drawn from their Bibles the belief that it was the sovereign purpose of God to bring all humanity to the point of submission to the lordship of Jesus Christ."[^3] This belief in the sovereign purpose of Protestant missions fueled a great deal of missionary endeavors and created the sending engine of Western missions. Stanely continues, "The goal of the Protestant missionary enterprise as understood by its founders was, then, an eschatological one: it was nothing less than the realisation [sic] of the biblical vision of a world transformed by being filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea."[^4] Furthermore, it provided structure and substance to the specific tactics of missionary engagement. One's understanding of their missionary activity rested upon their hope for what it would accomplish. In this way, certain aspects of one's eschatology determined the activities they classified as missions and the manner in which these activities would be executed. Key doctrines, such as millennial views and one's understanding of the kingdom of God, became bell weathers for particular missionary hopes and methods.
 
During certain eras in missions history, the eschatological thread becomes clearly visible as grounding for missionary activity. The Gilded Age and early Progressive Era in American history is one such time. Key doctrines, such as millennial views and one's understanding of the kingdom of God, became bell weathers for particular missionary hopes and methods by Protestant Americans. While this connection has been noted before concerning international mission efforts by American Protestants, the influence on home missions was no less significant, especially concerning cross-cultural missions toward the burgeoning immigrant populations of the era.[^5] Though not the exclusive factor, Protestant majority views on the millennium and the kingdom of God significantly influenced applied home missionary methods toward immigrants from 1880-1920, resulting in a syncretized mission to Christianize and Americanize the immigrant.
 
By the turn of the twentieth century, postmillennialism was the dominant eschatological position concerning the millennium. Furthermore, the millennial expectation was increasingly tied to human initiative and the ideal of progress. Moorhead writes, "Although the union of progress with the symbols of the Apocalypse may strike the contemporary reader as awkward or quaint, its widespread popularity suggests that postmillennialism-with all its antinomies-must be taken seriously if one wishes to understand the world as it appeared to many persons only a few generations ago."[^6] For the overwhelming majority of Protestants during the era, America civilization was conflated with the coming kingdom of God. Therefore, home missions to immigrants was cast as a dual mission to Christianize and Americanize those coming from abroad. For some Protestants, these new immigrants from different cultures were seen as a threat to the developing American civilization, which made them a threat for Protestants laboring to build the kingdom of God. For others, the arrival of these immigrants was an opportunity to showcase the superiority of Christian and American civilization, as it converted them to both. Regardless, both conflated the Christian mission with the cultural mission of American assimilation.
 
This paper will first consider the development of the dominant Protestant understanding of the millennium by tracing its origins, outlining its growth and entrenchment in the American Protestant conscience, and demonstrating its significance at the turn of the twentieth century. If American Protestants eschatological presuppositions grounded a mission of optimistically building the coming kingdom, then the content of that kingdom ideal comes to the fore in any applied theology. This paper will subsequently examine certain theologies of the kingdom, especially those influenced by Alrbecht Ritschl, and their role in crafting missionary missionary methods. Finally, the paper will survey missionary methods toward immigrants during the Gilded Age and early Progressive Era to showcase their reliance on Protestant eschatological commitments.
 
 ## Presupposition 1: The Development of the American Protestant Postmillennial Mindset

In 1911, Volume III of *A Dictionary of the Bible* included an article defining the theological concept of the millennium. The article was written by William Adams Brown, a prominent professor of systematic theology at Union Theological Seminary. Brown defines the the term millennium,

> "A name suggested by the period of 1000 years described in Rev 20:4-7, during which Satan is confined in the abyss, and the martyr saints reign with Christ. Hence variously understood, according to the interpretation put upon the passage, either as (1) the period, present or future, definite or indefinite, 'during which the kingdom of Christ will be established upon earth, and will dominate over all other authority' (Cent. Diet.); or more specially (2) as the period in which 'Christ will reign in bodily presence on earth for a thousand years' (Oxf. Eng. Dict. s. 'Chiliasm')." ^[(Brown,  [Millennium](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Millennium-A-Dictionary-of-the-Bible-22e7489f27e5448592d27f84d65ed0ab), Dictionary, 370.)]

Brown's definition serves as a typical explanation of the millennium from his era, and in the article, he makes two significant points concerning the prevailing eschatological views of Protestant Americans at that time. First, Brown rather quickly dismisses premillennialism. While noting its continued existence, Brown states that the position lives at the margins of opinion and had ultimately failed to garner the support of the Protestant church. Brown writes, "Pre-millenarian views have, indeed, been revived from time to time, now in grosser, now in more spiritual form, and have never been without their advocates in the Church ; but they have failed to win general acceptance." (Brown,  [Millennium](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Millennium-A-Dictionary-of-the-Bible-22e7489f27e5448592d27f84d65ed0ab), Dictionary, 373.) Second, Brown notes the prominence of Amillennialism and especially Postmillennialism. He continues, "The Church as a whole, Protestant as well as Catholic, has either adopted Augustine's identification of the Millennium with the Church militant, or else looks for a future period of prosperity, preceding the second advent of Christ."(Brown,  [Millennium](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Millennium-A-Dictionary-of-the-Bible-22e7489f27e5448592d27f84d65ed0ab), Dictionary, 373.)

**Postmillennialism: The Majority View**
Brown's assertion concerning the prominence of the postmillennial position in the Gilded Age and beginning of the Progressive era enjoys wide support. ([Endnote 1](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Endnote-1-27b950db92004317ae9c2474907d5bc6)) Sydney Ahlstrom writes that the American of this era was "characteristically a 'postmillennialist.'" (Ahlstrom,  [A Religious History of the American People](https://www.notion.so/keelan/A-Religious-History-of-the-American-Peoplw-30c17ca9fc9b499fbeec43804c29208c#3269e223c0d14b3b968862fa7d36b3db), 845.) James Moorhead records that clergymen of the nineteenth century referred to postmillennialism as "the commonly received doctrine." (Moorhead,  [Between Progress](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Between-Progress-and-Apocalypse-95850055e4ef495daa76aadcd6ce63c8#e24d378e947f4693ac63baac584ce782), 525.) As Brown notes, it would be overstatement to insist that every American Protestant adhered to a postmillennial eschatology, but it was certainly the majority perspective for at least a century. This perspective did much to impact both the fabric of American culture and the missionary methods of those Protestants. Moorhead writes,

> "As a distinct philosophy of history, postmillennialism dates from the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Although the notion that Jesus would return after the millennium had been advanced much earlier, it had not been made the key to the meaning of time. During that period, however, postmillennialism became more than a matter of dating the Second Coming: It came to denote an understanding of history as gradual improvement according to rational laws that human beings could learn and use." (Moorhead,  [Between Progress](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Between-Progress-and-Apocalypse-95850055e4ef495daa76aadcd6ce63c8#3dd9eace416d4cf4bf88bfa648743d20), 526.)

This theological optimism and confidence in the gears of progress roots deep into the religious history of the nation, and finds it's beginnings prior to the nineteenth century.

**British Beginnings (Prior to 1800)**
The Protestant conversation concerning the millennium certainly predates American Protestantism. In fact, a robust dialogue was occurring in England that laid much of the groundwork for the theological presuppositions which would support the American mindset. A divergence developed between those who believed the physical return of Christ was necessary for entering the millennium and those who felt history and human initiative would propel humanity toward the coming kingdom and a millennial reign of peace and prosperity. In 1703, Daniel Whitby authored the significant  _Paraphrase and Commentary on the New Testament_, in which he delivered a lengthy and systematic rebuttal to what he called the millenarian position, instead arguing for a millennialist position that would today be described as postmillennialism. (Whitby, Paraphrase and Commentary on the NT, 247-278 -  [FOONOTE 2](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Eschatology-and-Home-Missions-to-Immigrants-83a90a927618441faafd9f035dd9f67e#9de08db9ae1a4212b256b0bfadd07afa)) However, consistent nomenclature for these divergent views alludes wide acceptance.

Throughout the history of the conversation, the debate has been termed as "millenarians vs. millennialists", "millenarians vs. millenists", and "premillennialists vs. postmillennialists" among other less-accepted options. Perhaps Ernest Tuveson most siginificantly swayed the conversation toward the use of millenarians (premillennialists) and millennialists (postmillennialists). Tuveson notes that the Protestant conversation concerning the millennium was alive and well at least as far back as the seventeenth century, and he finds the commonly accepted terms today as unhelpful monikers for earlier views.(Tuveson,  [Redeemer Nation](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Redeemer-Nation-7bcf4d95c2e44e5a80a9e37ced9a0aa7#4f15ef0bd5314a23b1ad5139458b0ec7), 34. See also  [FOOTNOTE 3](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Eschatology-and-Home-Missions-to-Immigrants-83a90a927618441faafd9f035dd9f67e#df1949097e6f4e058a56136c785d7997)) Walls concurs, asserting the terms premillennialism and postmillennialism had not been invented in the early centuries of the Protestant debate on eschatology. (Walls,  [Eschatology and the Western Missionary Movement](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Eschatology-and-the-Western-Missionary-Movement-a4e4bd4eb99e43cd8482eb5b0950ac85#18854fe82a584e4187bf9d3a1826964d), 190.)

General commentary and academic debate concerning the nature of the millennium was happening extensively in Britain. Millenarians, for their part, placed little confidence in society at large and humanity's ability to bring about lasting progress. (Sandeen,  [Roots](https://www.notion.so/keelan/The-Roots-of-Fundamentalism-51bdfa4bb11845cb9fa3fe40e69a1717#6aa7636b43f14361a132ef57faf06199), 13.) Progressive millennialists, on the other hand, placed increasing trust in the wheels of progress as God's providential tool in history to bring about his kingdom. Tuveson points to a secularization thesis, beginning prior to the eighteenth century, that increasingly influenced millennialist thought and in turn shaped Protestantism and Western society as a whole. Taken from this perspective, the millennialist theology was as significant to the modern, historically positivist understanding of progress as secular enlightenment philosophy. (Tuveson,  [Millennium and Utopia](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Millennium-and-Utopia-300bec85c1fd4d71a6e7a4ad34866bd3#3e6fb6ceb3a748c5851aec8e7f747d87), 75.) Over time, the concepts of Providence were wed to those of natural law, humanity's social and religious development, and the laws of universal progress. ([FOOTNOTE 4](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Eschatology-and-Home-Missions-to-Immigrants-83a90a927618441faafd9f035dd9f67e#6c0b4d7095bc47a196d66720f1287d23))

By the eighteenth century, the millennialist position was generally accepted by the majority of Britisth Protestants. Despite certain groups advocating for a millenarian position during the French Revolution, views such as the Puritan "Fifth Monarchy" did more to distance many Protestants from the movement. Sandeen writes,

> "In reaction to the excesses of the Puritan revolution, millenarianism fell into disfavor in the eighteenth century, but churchmen did not return to the Augustinian position. In harmony with the Lockean tradition of rationalism and optimism, a new eschatology, most influentially stated by the Salisbury rector Daniel Whitby, emphasized the continued success of the church, the steady improvement of man and society, and the eventual culmination of Christian history in the coming of a literal millennium. Only at the end of that blessed age was Christ's second coming expected."
> 
> Sandeen,  [Roots of Fundamentalism](https://www.notion.so/keelan/The-Roots-of-Fundamentalism-51bdfa4bb11845cb9fa3fe40e69a1717#989e1c7f325f4f29bc1c0bfe75f726e7), 5.

Whitby's new way served as the foundation for the development of an increasingly secular understanding of progress as an analog to millennial expectations. British Protestants were not looking for the imminent return of King Jesus.

Sandeen,  [Roots](https://www.notion.so/keelan/The-Roots-of-Fundamentalism-51bdfa4bb11845cb9fa3fe40e69a1717#f4130ecffff0412fa2a29119f5d897df), 12.

Instead, they were increasingly confident in the wheels of human progress, especially the efforts of the church in directing society, as the agent of the coming kingdom. This early Protestant millennial optimism would not stay in Britain, however, as a new nation was being established across the ocean.

**A Revolutionary Idea?**

In the United States, a largely Protestant America was ripe for millennial speculation. The American religious landscape was a true offspring of European Protestantism, especially that of British separatists. De Jong writes,

> A significant dimension of this stimulation was the British eschatological heritage... The earliest as well as the most recent British commentators and theologians were read and recommended for study in the American missionary awakening. These British sources must be seen as reinforcing the Edwardean and more broadly evangelical eschatology already accepted by Americans and as calling Americans to assume the missionary responsibilities implied in their eschatology."
> 
> De Jong, As the Waters, 213.

The continued dialogue of British and American theologians and ministers created a mutually enforcing feedback loop concerning millennialist expectations. In doing so, they developed a rather homogeneous viewpoint. De Jong continues,

> "American and British sources on the latter days intertwined to give an eschatological interpretation to the French Revolution in Europe, to the Infidelity on both sides of the Atlantic, to the revivals, and to missionary movement. These were seen as signs of further progress in the rapid approach of the millennium. And an awareness of the impending climax of history gave new urgency to missionary and benevolent enterprises."
> 
> De Jong, As the Waters, 214.

This intercontinental perspective served as the eschatological foundation for the significant majority of American Protestants until the beginning of the Twentieth Century.

Despite its British origins, however, the new world provided a unique context to those theologizing about the millennium. American theologians of the mid-eighteenth century placed significance in the development of the new world, claiming providence was at play in shaping the kingdom to come. In contrast to the increasingly secular trajectory of millennialism in Britain, the American variety was initially revivalistic in nature. Perhaps the most influential American theologian of the eighteenth century, Jonathan Edwards attributed the coming of the millennium to the outburst of revivals in Scotland, Wales, and America. Kling writes,

> "According to Edwards, this new age would not come through cataclysmic means (as earlier interpreters had suggested), but through natural means, through the outpouring of God's Spirit manifested in Christian teaching, preaching, and religious activity... Christian activity was a precondition of the coming new age, for Christians who engaged in benevolent activities, social reform, and missionary outreach actually played a divinely ordained role in ushering in the kingdom of Christ."
> 
> Kling, New Divinity, Loc. 242.

While it was the natural laws of human civilization and progress that would bring about the change for many in England, it was the intentional spread of the gospel that would cover the entire earth through missions emanating outward from America. Speaking of the first Great Awakening, Handy writes, "Yet there was a pervasive sense among the awakeners and those whom they influenced that the future belonged to them and their way. They felt they were witnesses to the coming of the millennium, which God would bring to fulfillment in the not too distant future."

Handy, A Christian America, 18.

Edwards served as the fountainhead of a distinctly American Protestant postmillennialism. His influence cannot be overstated when considering the rise of the  [New Divinity](http://markup.rocks/#New%20Divinity)  movement, which traces its roots back into Edwards.

While it is widely accepted that the Protestant American missionary fervor found it's early voice through the influence of  [New Divinity](http://markup.rocks/#New%20Divinity), so did the closely intertwined issue of eschatology. In many ways, millennialism was the basis for this missionary fervor.

Kling,  [New Divinity](https://www.notion.so/keelan/The-New-Divinity-and-the-Origins-of-the-American-Board-of-Commissioners-of-Foreign-Missions-f4fab75d89dc4a7d8915b5bffa8d787f#66b85365c4af49db8dcdbc0e93c5064a), Loc. 160.  _NEED TO SEE HIS FOOTNOTE FOR THIS STATEMENT. SURELY HE GOES INTO DETAIL ABOUT SOURCES WHEN MAKING SUCH A CLAIM._

Samuel Hopkins, for instance, was one of Edwards closest companions and disciples. Hopkins too was convinced of the imminent dawn of the millennium through the spread of the gospel. (_CONSIDER CITING HOPKINS DIRECTLY_) De Jong writes, "For Hopkins missions would bring the millennium and the millennium would be characterized by heightened mission work."

De Jong, As the Waters, 208.

This activist understanding of millennialism relied on human initiative to usher in the millennium, as opposed to either natural catastrophes or other impersonal events. Edwards was one of the first in the colonies to base millennial advance on human initiative, and the characteristic was continued through the influence of New Divinity men.

Davidson, Logic, 270.

It would be the sacrificial spread of the gospel throughout the entire world that would finally bring to fruition the new  [kingdom of God](http://markup.rocks/#Kingdom%20of%20God).

De Jong, As the Waters, 211.

By the second half of the eighteenth century, human activity under the providence of God became the agent through which the millennial kingdom would arrive; however, this activity was centered around the spread of the gospel, as opposed to other social means, to Christianize the world in preparation for the coming kingdom.

-   _ADD PARAGRAPH that notes the work of Ruth Boch, Visionary Republic, and her central thesis._
    -   _In this paragraph, note her central thesis._
    -   _Also point out that it was millennialism jumbled into pre-post confusion at this time._

Many American Protestants entered the revolutionary period longing to see the hand of providence orchestrating their millennial vision. Kling writes, "America's revolutionary and postrevolutionary period (1776-1800) - a dramatic time indeed - unleashed a torrent of millennialist predictions, some premillennial, others postmillennial."

Kling, New Divinity, Loc. 316.

For many, America's short history proved fertile ground for millennial speculation. The establishment of the new world was, itself, seen as a sign of divine providence. In the wake of the war, American Protestants possessed the common sentiment that the results of the war were in fact a significant eschatological development. De Jong writes, "Their country was regarded as the potential seat of Christ's rule in that era, and evangelicals were compared with Cromwell's Roundheads for their consciousness of being divine instruments in realizing that day."

De Jong, As the Waters, 201-202.

American Protestants increasingly claimed a unique and elevated role in hastening the millennium.

Already optimistic concerning the global spread of the gospel, Protestants in America were increasingly certain the millennium was fast approaching. Kling writes, "However, as revivals of the Second Great Awakening (ca. 1790-1835) advanced in both intensity and duration, a confidence grew that the millennium was an approaching reality. The apocalyptic element of millennial thought, which was associated with the destruction of the world prior to Christ's return, gave way to more hopeful millennial expectations."

Kling, New Divinity, Loc. 316.

This optimism weighted opinions concerning the millennium toward a postmillennial perspective. Davidson writes,

> "Postmillennialism thus came into its own only when divines consciously argued that Christ's figurative millennial reign demanded human action; that natural catastrophes were inappropriate means of providential accomplishments in such a scenario; and that, consequently, history was to be seen as a series of gradual, progressive steps toward this-wordly perfection."
> 
> Davidson, 262.

Through the influence of the divines during the eigtheenth century, American Protestantism widely embraced millennialism as the optimistic end for which the church must expend its resources and effort.

**Development During the 1800s**

The first half of the nineteenth century proved a fertile period in American history for millennial speculation. As Earnest Sandeen writes, "America in the early nineteenth century was drunk on the millennium. whether in support of optimism or pessimism, radicalism or conservatism, Americans seemed unable to avoid- seemed bound to utilize-the vocabulary of eschatology."

Sandeen, Roots, 42.

Indeed, millennial interest was part of the vernacular during the era. Though having very different concepts of how it would occur, men like William Miller and Alexander Campbell stressed the importance, and even immanence, of the millennium. Miller went so far as to predict that the millennium would begin before the middle of the nineteenth century, and he was not alone in his confidence. During this era in American Protestant history, the group commonly referred to as Shakers during this era were officially the Millennial Church of the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing and believed the second advent had already occurred.

Sandeen, Roots, 48-49 —  _Find Edward Demming Andrews, The People Called Shakers (New York, 1963)._

Shakers were not alone in this belief, as other sects of Protestant Christianity in America held similar views.

Sandeen, Roots, 49 —  _Need to pull out original sources on the Oneida Community, and maybe some others if possible. List here a couple of groups that held this view with a brief sentence on what they believed. J.H. Noyes, Confession of Religious Experience, Oneida Reserve, 1849, is an excellent quote talking about how pervasive the crazy views were, and how these people got swept up into it. I need to pull the quote found in Sandeen on page 49._

In addition, the Mormon church was established with an intense interest in establishing the kingdom, their move to Utah essentially being a literal attempt at building it.

Sandeen, Roots, 47-49 —  _Find a better source._

The nineteenth century was ripe for eschatological dialogue.

-   _Summary at the end of this paragraph with the guy Sandeen quotes giving a confession of the fervor. Find him in footnote 6._

During the first half of the century, a more recognizable divide between a pre- and postmillennialism emerged, with the former pessimistic about the direction of society and the latter increasingly optimistic that the American experiment was also a kingdom enterprise.

Davidson, Logic, 260.

As Handy notes, millennial approaches spread across a spectrum, from purely literal interpretations of apocalyptic literature to completely spiritualized or allegorized interpretations. For some, it was only the physical, miraculous return of Christ that could usher in any kind of millennial kingdom. For others, and increasingly for the major Protestant American denominations, it was "the climax of the Christianization of civilization, fulfilling history."

Handy, A Christian America, 30.

Kling writes, "By 1810, after nearly two decades of revivals, evangelicals faced the future with considerably more confidence than they did in 1790."

Kling, New Divinity, Loc. 201.

This optimism led to confidence in the ability of Protestants to truly Christianize society, even on a global scale. With the establishment of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (ABCFM), this growing postmillennial optimism was on full display. The first annual report of the claims, "The long expected day is approaching. The Lord is shaking the nations; his friends in different parts of christendom [sic] are roused from their slumbers; and unprecedented exertions are making for the spread of divine knowledge, and the conversion of the nations."

'Minutes of the First Annual Meeting,' in First Ten Annual Reports of the American Board of Commissions of Foreign Missions, With Documents of the Board, 13.

With postmillennial optimism on the rise and the failure of the Millerite predictions concerning the second advent in the 1840s, premillennialist groups anticipating the physical return of Christ made easy targets for caricature and the view came under increasing scrutiny. A flurry of activity occurred in the years preceding the Millerite prediction. Miller himself began to feel he was the leader of a movement.

Nichol, Francis D. The Midnight Cry: A Defense of the Character and Conduct of William Miller and the Millerites, Who Mistakenly Believed That the Second Coming of Christ Would Take Place in the Year 1844. Vol. Reproduction. Brushton, New York: TEACH Services, Inc., 2000. Page 80.

Conferences on the second coming of Christ began in 1840.

Himes, J. V. “A General Conference on the Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ.” Signs of the Times 1.11 (1840): 84.

As these conferences gained momentum, churches from across denominations began to coalesce into a parallel Millerite coalition that looked much like a denomination itself. The group began to publish its own newspaper and developed their own hymnal.

See Joshua Vaughan Himes, Millennial Harp: Designed for Meetings on the Second Coming of Christ (Boston: J.V. Himes, 1843) as well as Himes, Signs of the Times.

With the supposed event drawing close, pressure mounted and many of the leaders of the movement were removed from their respective denominations. Sandeen writes, "But on 22 October 1844 the sun sank as it had on every other day since creation, and Christ had not come. In retrospect the Millerite movement appears to have virtually destroyed premillennialism in America for a generation."

(Sandeen, Roots, 54)

As premillennialism lost favor, postmillennial optimism grew with adherence to the latter eventually eclipsing the former.

Those still maintaining a premillennialist commitment moved into the margins of Protestant thought. Preaching before a gathering of the First Synod of New Jersey in 1849, Presbyterian minister Charles Imbrie pleaded for the church not be swayed by the majority thinking concerning postmillennialism and used his address to expound differences between the competing views. Imbrie recognizes the similarities shared by the divergent millennial views in the beginning, moving on to note disparities and their significance to missions. Of chief concern to Imbrie are the postmillennial assertions of a spiritual kingdom instead of the physical return of Christ and the optimistic means through which this will occur. Imbrie writes, "In some day when the gospel shall be proclaimed, it will not, as now, bring in only a part, but will convert every hearer. A new law of success is suddenly to arise, and the church is gradually, or towards the last perhaps, more rapidly, to be transfused into the millennial state."

Imbrie, Charles K. Kingdom of God: A Discourse Preached Before the Synod of New Jersey, October 17, 1849. New York: Franklin Knight, 1850.

Nevertheless, Imbrie's address takes the form of a plea, as he admits postmillennialism to be the pervading view of the era.

(Imbrie, 51)

In fact, the postmillennial vision of Christianizing the social order in order to usher in the millennium gained so much traction that its social influence was eventually assumed across the spectrum of millennial views. Handy writes, "Even those who stressed premillinnialist or millenarian views, however, often saw the work of Christianizing society as a preparation for the coming of the Lord."

Handy, A Christian America, 31.

For many, the idea of creating a Christian society was attainable after decades of revivals and Protestant expansion across the growing frontier. This optimism coincided with the malaise produced by the miscalculations of Millerites and other premillennial groups, pushing the mainstream of American Protestantism toward postmillennial convictions. Handy continues, "For them, the religious quest and the civil process, though clearly distinct, moved toward the same happy climax."

Handy, A Christian America, 31.

By the middle of the century, however, the distinction between civilizing and Christianizing began to diminish as the two ideas merged into a overarching mission for Protestant America.

The first half of the nineteenth century witnessed the crystallization of a majority Protestant view in favor of postmillennialism. Davidson writes, ""By the 1820s the perspective had changed considerably. Postmillennialism had become a well- established, coherent position..."

Davidson, 270.

The events that transpired over the course of the century only increased the dominance of the postmillennial position. By the last half of the century, postmillennialism was assumed for most Protestants, reaching the level of a theological presupposition upon which rested the applied theology of the era. This dominance gave Brown the confidence to write only a few decades later of how the majority of the Church, "looks for a future period of prosperity, preceding the second advent of Christ."

Brown, Millennium, Dictionary, 373.

Though only one of many presuppositions, postmillennialism shaded both the theological questions and answers as the Gilded Age and Progressive Era approached.
 

[^1]: Bosch, Transforming Mission, 2 and Endnote 1

[^2]: Walls, Eschatology and the Western Missionary Movement, 182.

[^3]: Stanely, Future in the Past, 102-103

[^4]: Stanely, Future in the Past, 103

[^5]: Rogers, A Bright New Constellation, traces the impact of millennial narratives on the development of American Protestant foreign missions.

[^6]: Moorhead, Between Progress, 525-526. 
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEwMDExNjQ5ODUsLTE5MTE0MjUzNzksLT
E2ODM3NTEzNiwtMTA4MDgxNTgxMiwtMTI2NTY3MTc5OCwtMTM2
OTAzNDAwLC05NTEzNDExNjMsLTIwODg3NDY2MTJdfQ==
-->