
# Introduction
Eschatology births missiology. Certainly Kahler's statement, as quoted by Bosch, rings true that mission is the mother of theology. However, even Bosch continues by citing Kasemann's claim that apocalyptic literature serves as the headwaters of theology in the New Testament. Bosch concludes these two ideas—mission and apocalyptic—are complementary.^[Bosch, Transforming Mission, 2 and Endnote 1] Eschatology and missiology stand in unique relationship one to another. One's eschatology provides shape and direction to missions, while one's missiology provides response to convictions concerning the ultimate *telos* of creation. Walls rightly summarizes this connection, stating, "Eschatology is where theology meets history most intimately, since it is concerned with history’s end and meaning."^[Walls, Eschatology and the Western Missionary Movement, 182.]
 
An eschatological thread can be traced throughout the entire modern missions movements. Stanely writes, "From the genesis of the evangelical Protestant missionary movement in the mid-eighteenth century supporters of Christian missions had drawn from their Bibles the belief that it was the sovereign purpose of God to bring all humanity to the point of submission to the lordship of Jesus Christ."^[Stanely, Future in the Past, 102-103.] This belief in the sovereign purpose of Protestant missions fueled a great deal of missionary endeavors and created the sending engine of Western missions. Stanely continues, "The goal of the Protestant missionary enterprise as understood by its founders was, then, an eschatological one: it was nothing less than the realisation [sic] of the biblical vision of a world transformed by being filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea."^[Stanely, Future in the Past, 103.] Furthermore, it provided structure and substance to the specific tactics of missionary engagement. One's understanding of their missionary activity rested upon their hope for what it would accomplish. In this way, certain aspects of one's eschatology determined the activities they classified as missions and the manner in which these activities would be executed. Key doctrines, such as millennial views and one's understanding of the kingdom of God, became bell weathers for particular missionary hopes and methods.
 
During certain eras in missions history, the eschatological thread becomes clearly visible as grounding for missionary activity. The Gilded Age and early Progressive Era in American history is one such time. Key doctrines, such as millennial views and one's understanding of the kingdom of God, became bell weathers for particular missionary hopes and methods by Protestant Americans. While this connection has been noted before concerning international mission efforts by American Protestants, the influence on home missions was no less significant, especially concerning cross-cultural missions toward the burgeoning immigrant populations of the era.^[Rogers, A Bright New Constellation, traces the impact of millennial narratives on the development of American Protestant foreign missions.] Though not the exclusive factor, Protestant majority views on the millennium and the kingdom of God significantly influenced applied home missionary methods toward immigrants from 1880-1920, resulting in a syncretized mission to Christianize and Americanize the immigrant.
 
By the turn of the twentieth century, postmillennialism was the dominant eschatological position concerning the millennium. Furthermore, the millennial expectation was increasingly tied to human initiative and the ideal of progress. Moorhead writes, "Although the union of progress with the symbols of the Apocalypse may strike the contemporary reader as awkward or quaint, its widespread popularity suggests that postmillennialism-with all its antinomies-must be taken seriously if one wishes to understand the world as it appeared to many persons only a few generations ago."^[Moorhead, Between Progress, 525-526.] For the overwhelming majority of Protestants during the era, America civilization was conflated with the coming kingdom of God. Therefore, home missions to immigrants was cast as a dual mission to Christianize and Americanize those coming from abroad. For some Protestants, these new immigrants from different cultures were seen as a threat to the developing American civilization, which made them a threat for Protestants laboring to build the kingdom of God. For others, the arrival of these immigrants was an opportunity to showcase the superiority of Christian and American civilization, as it converted them to both. Regardless, both conflated the Christian mission with the cultural mission of American assimilation.
 
This paper will first consider the development of the dominant Protestant understanding of the millennium by tracing its origins, outlining its growth and entrenchment in the American Protestant conscience, and demonstrating its significance at the turn of the twentieth century. If American Protestants' eschatological presuppositions grounded a mission of optimistically building the coming kingdom, then the content of that kingdom ideal comes to the fore in any applied theology. This paper will subsequently examine certain theologies of the kingdom, especially those influenced by Albrecht Ritschl, and their role in crafting missionary missionary methods. Finally, the paper will survey missionary methods toward immigrants during the Gilded Age and early Progressive Era to showcase their reliance on Protestant eschatological commitments.
 
# Presupposition 1: The Development of the American Protestant Postmillennial Mindset

In 1911, Volume III of *A Dictionary of the Bible* included an article defining the theological concept of the millennium. The article was written by William Adams Brown, a prominent professor of systematic theology at Union Theological Seminary. Brown defines the the term millennium,

> "A name suggested by the period of 1000 years described in Rev 20:4-7, during which Satan is confined in the abyss, and the martyr saints reign with Christ. Hence variously understood, according to the interpretation put upon the passage, either as (1) the period, present or future, definite or indefinite, 'during which the kingdom of Christ will be established upon earth, and will dominate over all other authority' (Cent. Diet.); or more specially (2) as the period in which 'Christ will reign in bodily presence on earth for a thousand years' (Oxf. Eng. Dict. s. 'Chiliasm')."^[Brown, Millennium, Dictionary, 370.]

Brown's definition serves as a typical explanation of the millennium from his era, and in the article, he makes two significant points concerning the prevailing eschatological views of Protestant Americans at that time. First, Brown rather quickly dismisses premillennialism. While noting its continued existence, Brown states that the position lives at the margins of opinion and had ultimately failed to garner the support of the Protestant church. Brown writes, "Pre-millenarian views have, indeed, been revived from time to time, now in grosser, now in more spiritual form, and have never been without their advocates in the Church; but they have failed to win general acceptance." ^[Brown, Millennium, Dictionary, 373.] Second, Brown notes the prominence of Amillennialism and especially Postmillennialism. He continues, "The Church as a whole, Protestant as well as Catholic, has either adopted Augustine's identification of the Millennium with the Church militant, or else looks for a future period of prosperity, preceding the second advent of Christ."^[Brown,  Millennium, Dictionary, 373.]

## Postmillennialism: The Majority View
Brown's assertion concerning the prominence of the postmillennial position in the Gilded Age and beginning of the Progressive era enjoys wide support.^[Numerous sources confirm the prevalence, and even ubiquity, of the postmillennial position in the United States throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. See Smith, Gary Scott. Heaven in the American Imagination. Oxford University Press, 2011, 128; Utzinger, Yet Saints Their Watch are Keeping 111; Ahlstrom, A Religious History of the American People, 845; Moorhead, Between Progress, 525-526.] Sydney Ahlstrom writes that the American of this era was "characteristically a 'postmillennialist.'"^[Ahlstrom,  [A Religious History of the American People](https://www.notion.so/keelan/A-Religious-History-of-the-American-Peoplw-30c17ca9fc9b499fbeec43804c29208c#3269e223c0d14b3b968862fa7d36b3db), 845.] James Moorhead records that clergymen of the nineteenth century referred to postmillennialism as "the commonly received doctrine."^[Moorhead, [Between Progress](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Between-Progress-and-Apocalypse-95850055e4ef495daa76aadcd6ce63c8#e24d378e947f4693ac63baac584ce782), 525.] As Brown notes, it would be an overstatement to insist that every American Protestant adhered to a postmillennial eschatology, but it was certainly the majority perspective for at least a century. This perspective did much to impact both the fabric of American culture and the missionary methods of those Protestants. Moorhead writes,

> "As a distinct philosophy of history, postmillennialism dates from the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Although the notion that Jesus would return after the millennium had been advanced much earlier, it had not been made the key to the meaning of time. During that period, however, postmillennialism became more than a matter of dating the Second Coming: It came to denote an understanding of history as gradual improvement according to rational laws that human beings could learn and use."^[Moorhead, [Between Progress](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Between-Progress-and-Apocalypse-95850055e4ef495daa76aadcd6ce63c8#3dd9eace416d4cf4bf88bfa648743d20), 526.]

This theological optimism and confidence in the gears of progress roots deep into the religious history of the nation, and finds its beginnings prior to the nineteenth century.

## British Beginnings (Prior to 1800)
The Protestant conversation concerning the millennium certainly predates American Protestantism. In fact, a robust dialogue was occurring in England that laid much of the groundwork for the theological presuppositions that would support the American mindset. A divergence developed between those who believed the physical return of Christ was necessary for entering the millennium and those who felt history and human initiative would propel humanity toward the coming kingdom and a millennial reign of peace and prosperity. In 1703, Daniel Whitby authored the significant  _Paraphrase and Commentary on the New Testament_, in which he delivered a lengthy and systematic rebuttal to what he called the millenarian position, instead arguing for a millennialist position that would today be described as postmillennialism.^[Whitby, Paraphrase and Commentary on the New Testament, London: W. Bowyer, 1703, 247-278, provides a multiple-chapter treatise on the millennium, which is a very long and detailed refutation of a premillennialist (millenarian) position. In this section, he specifically addresses the doctrine from historical and biblical perspectives, providing both a detailed history of interpretation for the early church on the issue and a survey of biblical material on the issue. He negatively refutes certain positions of the millenarian view, he positively affirms others, and he concludes with his own understanding that serves as one of the earliest Protestant systematic treatments in favor of a postmillennialist position.] However, consistent nomenclature for these divergent views alludes wide acceptance.

Throughout the history of the conversation, the debate has been termed as "millenarians vs. millennialists", "millenarians vs. millenists", and "premillennialists vs. postmillennialists" among other less-accepted options. Perhaps Ernest Tuveson most significantly swayed the conversation toward the use of millenarians (premillennialists) and millennialists (postmillennialists). Tuveson notes that the Protestant conversation concerning the millennium was alive and well at least as far back as the seventeenth century, and he finds the commonly accepted terms today as unhelpful monikers for earlier views.^[Tuveson,  [Redeemer Nation](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Redeemer-Nation-7bcf4d95c2e44e5a80a9e37ced9a0aa7#4f15ef0bd5314a23b1ad5139458b0ec7), 34. See also Tuveson, Millennium and Utopia, 71-112, for a thorough treatment of eschatological development in British Protestant thought prior to the 1800s.] Walls concurs, asserting the terms premillennialism and postmillennialism had not been invented in the early centuries of the Protestant debate on eschatology.^[Walls,  [Eschatology and the Western Missionary Movement](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Eschatology-and-the-Western-Missionary-Movement-a4e4bd4eb99e43cd8482eb5b0950ac85#18854fe82a584e4187bf9d3a1826964d), 190.]

General commentary and academic debate concerning the nature of the millennium was happening extensively in Britain. Millenarians, for their part, placed little confidence in society at large and humanity's ability to bring about lasting progress.^[Sandeen,  [Roots](https://www.notion.so/keelan/The-Roots-of-Fundamentalism-51bdfa4bb11845cb9fa3fe40e69a1717#6aa7636b43f14361a132ef57faf06199), 13.] Progressive millennialists, on the other hand, placed increasing trust in the wheels of progress as God's providential tool in history to bring about his kingdom. Tuveson points to a secularization thesis, beginning prior to the eighteenth century, that increasingly influenced millennialist thought and in turn shaped Protestantism and Western society as a whole. Taken from this perspective, the millennialist theology was as significant to the modern, historically positivist understanding of progress as secular enlightenment philosophy.^[Tuveson,  [Millennium and Utopia](https://www.notion.so/keelan/Millennium-and-Utopia-300bec85c1fd4d71a6e7a4ad34866bd3#3e6fb6ceb3a748c5851aec8e7f747d87), 75.] Over time, the concepts of Providence were wed to those of natural law, humanity's social and religious development, and the laws of universal progress.^[Tuveson, Millennium and Utopia, 139, 149, 152, outlines the trajectory of millennial doctrine as it increasingly conflates first with the concept of natural law and subsequently with the scientific ideas of social and racial progress, ultimately culminating the a doctrine of progress as universal law.] 

By the eighteenth century, the millennialist position was generally accepted by the majority of British Protestants. Despite certain groups advocating for a millenarian position during the French Revolution, views such as the Puritan "Fifth Monarchy" did more to distance many Protestants from the movement. Sandeen writes,

> "In reaction to the excesses of the Puritan revolution, millenarianism fell into disfavor in the eighteenth century, but churchmen did not return to the Augustinian position. In harmony with the Lockean tradition of rationalism and optimism, a new eschatology, most influentially stated by the Salisbury rector Daniel Whitby, emphasized the continued success of the church, the steady improvement of man and society, and the eventual culmination of Christian history in the coming of a literal millennium. Only at the end of that blessed age was Christ's second coming expected."^[Sandeen,  [Roots of Fundamentalism](https://www.notion.so/keelan/The-Roots-of-Fundamentalism-51bdfa4bb11845cb9fa3fe40e69a1717#989e1c7f325f4f29bc1c0bfe75f726e7), 5.]

Whitby's new way served as the foundation for the development of an increasingly secular understanding of progress as an analog to millennial expectations. British Protestants were not looking for the imminent return of King Jesus.^[Sandeen,  [Roots](https://www.notion.so/keelan/The-Roots-of-Fundamentalism-51bdfa4bb11845cb9fa3fe40e69a1717#f4130ecffff0412fa2a29119f5d897df), 12.]

Instead, they were increasingly confident in the wheels of human progress, especially the efforts of the church in directing society, as the agent of the coming kingdom. This early Protestant millennial optimism would not stay in Britain, however, as a new nation was being established across the ocean.

## A Revolutionary Idea?
In the United States, a largely Protestant America was ripe for millennial speculation. The American religious landscape was a true offspring of European Protestantism, especially that of British separatists. De Jong writes,

> A significant dimension of this stimulation was the British eschatological heritage... The earliest as well as the most recent British commentators and theologians were read and recommended for study in the American missionary awakening. These British sources must be seen as reinforcing the Edwardean and more broadly evangelical eschatology already accepted by Americans and as calling Americans to assume the missionary responsibilities implied in their eschatology."^[De Jong, As the Waters, 213.]

The continued dialogue of British and American theologians and ministers created a mutually enforcing feedback loop concerning millennialist expectations. In doing so, they developed a rather homogeneous viewpoint. De Jong continues,

> "American and British sources on the latter days intertwined to give an eschatological interpretation to the French Revolution in Europe, to the Infidelity on both sides of the Atlantic, to the revivals, and to missionary movement. These were seen as signs of further progress in the rapid approach of the millennium. And an awareness of the impending climax of history gave new urgency to missionary and benevolent enterprises."^[De Jong, As the Waters, 214.]

This intercontinental perspective served as the eschatological foundation for the significant majority of American Protestants until the beginning of the Twentieth Century.

Despite its British origins, however, the new world provided a unique context to those theologizing about the millennium. American theologians of the mid-eighteenth century placed significance in the development of the new world, claiming providence was at play in shaping the kingdom to come. In contrast to the increasingly secular trajectory of millennialism in Britain, the American variety was initially revivalistic in nature. Perhaps the most influential American theologian of the eighteenth century, Jonathan Edwards attributed the coming of the millennium to the outburst of revivals in Scotland, Wales, and America. Kling writes,

> "According to Edwards, this new age would not come through cataclysmic means (as earlier interpreters had suggested), but through natural means, through the outpouring of God's Spirit manifested in Christian teaching, preaching, and religious activity... Christian activity was a precondition of the coming new age, for Christians who engaged in benevolent activities, social reform, and missionary outreach actually played a divinely ordained role in ushering in the kingdom of Christ."^[Kling, New Divinity, Loc. 242.]

While it was the natural laws of human civilization and progress that would bring about the change for many in England, it was the intentional spread of the gospel that would cover the entire earth through missions emanating outward from America. Speaking of the first Great Awakening, Handy writes, "Yet there was a pervasive sense among the awakeners and those whom they influenced that the future belonged to them and their way. They felt they were witnesses to the coming of the millennium, which God would bring to fulfillment in the not too distant future."^[Handy, A Christian America, 18.] Edwards served as the fountainhead of a distinctly American Protestant postmillennialism. His influence cannot be overstated when considering the rise of the New Divinity movement, which traces its roots back into Edwards.

While it is widely accepted that the Protestant American missionary fervor found its early voice through the influence of New Divinity, so did the closely intertwined issue of eschatology. In many ways, millennialism was the basis for this missionary fervor.^[Kling,  [New Divinity](https://www.notion.so/keelan/The-New-Divinity-and-the-Origins-of-the-American-Board-of-Commissioners-of-Foreign-Missions-f4fab75d89dc4a7d8915b5bffa8d787f#66b85365c4af49db8dcdbc0e93c5064a), Loc. 160.  _NEED TO SEE HIS FOOTNOTE FOR THIS STATEMENT. SURELY HE GOES INTO DETAIL ABOUT SOURCES WHEN MAKING SUCH A CLAIM._]

Samuel Hopkins, for instance, was one of Edwards's closest companions and disciples. Hopkins too was convinced of the imminent dawn of the millennium through the spread of the gospel. (_CONSIDER CITING HOPKINS DIRECTLY_) De Jong writes, "For Hopkins missions would bring the millennium and the millennium would be characterized by heightened mission work."^[De Jong, As the Waters, 208.]

This activist understanding of millennialism relied on human initiative to usher in the millennium, as opposed to either natural catastrophes or other impersonal events. Edwards was one of the first in the colonies to base millennial advance on human initiative, and the characteristic was continued through the influence of New Divinity men.^[Davidson, Logic, 270.] It would be the sacrificial spread of the gospel throughout the entire world that would finally bring to fruition the new kingdom of God.^[De Jong, As the Waters, 211.]

By the second half of the eighteenth century, human activity under the providence of God became the agent through which the millennial kingdom would arrive; however, this activity was centered around the spread of the gospel, as opposed to other social means, to Christianize the world in preparation for the coming kingdom.

`ADD PARAGRAPH 
that notes the work of Ruth Boch, Visionary Republic, and her central thesis.In this paragraph, note her central thesis.Also point out that it was millennialism jumbled into pre-post confusion at this time._`

Many American Protestants entered the revolutionary period longing to see the hand of providence orchestrating their millennial vision. Kling writes, "America's revolutionary and postrevolutionary period (1776-1800) - a dramatic time indeed - unleashed a torrent of millennialist predictions, some premillennial, others postmillennial."^[Kling, New Divinity, Loc. 316.] For many, America's short history proved fertile ground for millennial speculation. The establishment of the new world was, itself, seen as a sign of divine providence. In the wake of the war, American Protestants possessed the common sentiment that the results of the war were in fact a significant eschatological development.^[Noll, Mark A., The Search for Christian America (Westchester, Ill.: Crossway Books, 1983), 61-62 expounds upon a misplaced millennial expectation that was birthed out of the Puritan vision of Edwards and developed into support for the American Revolution.] De Jong writes, "Their country was regarded as the potential seat of Christ's rule in that era, and evangelicals were compared with Cromwell's Roundheads for their consciousness of being divine instruments in realizing that day."^[De Jong, As the Waters, 201-202.] American Protestants increasingly claimed a unique and elevated role in hastening the millennium.

Already optimistic concerning the global spread of the gospel, Protestants in America were increasingly certain the millennium was fast approaching. Kling writes, "However, as revivals of the Second Great Awakening (ca. 1790-1835) advanced in both intensity and duration, a confidence grew that the millennium was an approaching reality. The apocalyptic element of millennial thought, which was associated with the destruction of the world prior to Christ's return, gave way to more hopeful millennial expectations."^[Kling, New Divinity, Loc. 316.]

This optimism weighted opinions concerning the millennium toward a postmillennial perspective. Davidson writes,

> "Postmillennialism thus came into its own only when divines consciously argued that Christ's figurative millennial reign demanded human action; that natural catastrophes were inappropriate means of providential accomplishments in such a scenario; and that, consequently, history was to be seen as a series of gradual, progressive steps toward this-wordly perfection."^[Davidson, 262.]

Through the influence of the divines during the eighteenth century, American Protestantism widely embraced millennialism as the optimistic end for which the church must expend its resources and effort.

## Development During the 1800s
The first half of the nineteenth century proved a fertile period in American history for millennial speculation. As Earnest Sandeen writes, "America in the early nineteenth century was drunk on the millennium. whether in support of optimism or pessimism, radicalism or conservatism, Americans seemed unable to avoid- seemed bound to utilize-the vocabulary of eschatology."^[Sandeen, Roots, 42.]

Indeed, millennial interest was part of the vernacular during the era. Though having very different concepts of how it would occur, men like William Miller and Alexander Campbell stressed the importance, and even immanence, of the millennium. Miller went so far as to predict that the millennium would begin before the middle of the nineteenth century, and he was not alone in his confidence. During this era in American Protestant history, the group commonly referred to as Shakers during this era were officially the Millennial Church of the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing and believed the second advent had already occurred.^[Sandeen, Roots, 48-49. `Find Edward Demming Andrews, The People Called Shakers (New York, 1963).`]

Shakers were not alone in this belief, as other sects of Protestant Christianity in America held similar views.^[Sandeen, Roots, 49. `Need to pull out original sources on the Oneida Community, and maybe some others if possible. List here a couple of groups that held this view with a brief sentence on what they believed. J.H. Noyes, Confession of Religious Experience, Oneida Reserve, 1849, is an excellent quote talking about how pervasive the crazy views were, and how these people got swept up into it. I need to pull the quote found in Sandeen on page 49.`]

In addition, the Mormon church was established with an intense interest in establishing the kingdom, their move to Utah essentially being a literal attempt at building it.^[Sandeen, Roots, 47-49 `Find a better source.`]

The nineteenth century was ripe for eschatological dialogue.

`Summary at the end of this paragraph with the guy Sandeen quotes giving a confession of the fervor. Find him in footnote 6.`

During the first half of the century, a more recognizable divide between a pre- and postmillennialism emerged, with the former pessimistic about the direction of society and the latter increasingly optimistic that the American experiment was also a kingdom enterprise.^[Davidson, Logic, 260.]

As Handy notes, millennial approaches spread across a spectrum, from purely literal interpretations of apocalyptic literature to completely spiritualized or allegorized interpretations. For some, it was only the physical, miraculous return of Christ that could usher in any kind of millennial kingdom. For others, and increasingly for the major Protestant American denominations, it was "the climax of the Christianization of civilization, fulfilling history."^[Handy, A Christian America, 30.]

Kling writes, "By 1810, after nearly two decades of revivals, evangelicals faced the future with considerably more confidence than they did in 1790."^[Kling, New Divinity, Loc. 201.]

This optimism led to confidence in the ability of Protestants to truly Christianize society, even on a global scale. With the establishment of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (ABCFM), this growing postmillennial optimism was on full display. The first annual report of the  claims, "The long expected day is approaching. The Lord is shaking the nations; his friends in different parts of christendom [sic] are roused from their slumbers; and unprecedented exertions are making for the spread of divine knowledge, and the conversion of the nations."^['Minutes of the First Annual Meeting,' in First Ten Annual Reports of the American Board of Commissions of Foreign Missions, With Documents of the Board, 13.]

With postmillennial optimism on the rise and the failure of the Millerite predictions concerning the second advent in the 1840s, premillennialist groups anticipating the physical return of Christ made easy targets for caricature and the view came under increasing scrutiny. A flurry of activity occurred in the years preceding the Millerite prediction. Miller himself began to feel he was the leader of a movement.^[Nichol, Francis D. The Midnight Cry: A Defense of the Character and Conduct of William Miller and the Millerites, Who Mistakenly Believed That the Second Coming of Christ Would Take Place in the Year 1844. Vol. Reproduction. Brushton, New York: TEACH Services, Inc., 2000. Page 80.]

Conferences on the second coming of Christ began in 1840.^[Himes, J. V. “A General Conference on the Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ.” Signs of the Times 1.11 (1840): 84.]

As these conferences gained momentum, churches from across denominations began to coalesce into a parallel Millerite coalition that looked much like a denomination itself. The group began to publish its own newspaper and developed their own hymnal.^[See Joshua Vaughan Himes, Millennial Harp: Designed for Meetings on the Second Coming of Christ (Boston: J.V. Himes, 1843) as well as Himes, Signs of the Times.]

With the supposed event drawing close, pressure mounted and many of the leaders of the movement were removed from their respective denominations. Sandeen writes, "But on 22 October 1844 the sun sank as it had on every other day since creation, and Christ had not come. In retrospect the Millerite movement appears to have virtually destroyed premillennialism in America for a generation."^[Sandeen, Roots, 54.] As premillennialism lost favor, postmillennial optimism grew with adherence to the latter eventually eclipsing the former.

Those still maintaining a premillennialist commitment moved into the margins of Protestant thought. Preaching before a gathering of the First Synod of New Jersey in 1849, Presbyterian minister Charles Imbrie pleaded for the church not be swayed by the majority thinking concerning postmillennialism and used his address to expound differences between the competing views. Imbrie recognized the similarities shared by the divergent millennial views in the beginning, moving on to note disparities and their significance to missions. Of chief concern to Imbrie were the postmillennial assertions of a spiritual kingdom instead of the physical return of Christ and the optimistic means through which this will occur. Imbrie writes, "In some day when the gospel shall be proclaimed, it will not, as now, bring in only a part, but will convert every hearer. A new law of success is suddenly to arise, and the church is gradually, or towards the last perhaps, more rapidly, to be transfused into the millennial state."^[Imbrie, Charles K. Kingdom of God: A Discourse Preached Before the Synod of New Jersey, October 17, 1849. New York: Franklin Knight, 1850.] Nevertheless, Imbrie's address takes the form of a plea, as he admits postmillennialism to be the pervading view of the era.^[Imbrie, 51.]

In fact, the postmillennial vision of Christianizing the social order in order to usher in the millennium gained so much traction that its social influence was eventually assumed across the spectrum of millennial views. Handy writes, "Even those who stressed premillennialist or millenarian views, however, often saw the work of Christianizing society as a preparation for the coming of the Lord."^[Handy, A Christian America, 31.] For many, the idea of creating a Christian society was attainable after decades of revivals and Protestant expansion across the growing frontier. This optimism coincided with the malaise produced by the miscalculations of Millerites and other premillennial groups, pushing the mainstream of American Protestantism toward postmillennial convictions. Handy continues, "For them, the religious quest and the civil process, though clearly distinct, moved toward the same happy climax."^[Handy, A Christian America, 31.] By the middle of the century, however, the distinction between civilizing and Christianizing began to diminish as the two ideas merged into an overarching mission for Protestant America.

In the final decades of the nineteenth century, Christianizing and civilizing were increasingly indistinguishable, though hopes of a future, perhaps already present, period of peace and prosperity were still alive and well. As the more traditional apocalyptic vision of a coming millennium came in contact with German scholarship and the rise of social scientific theories, postmillennial commitments adjusted. Scholars began to strip away aspects of the doctrine, such as a literal return of Christ at the end of the millennium.^[Merrill, S.M.,  The  Second  Coming  of Christ  (Cincinnati,  1879), pp.  13, 282. See also William  N.  Clarke,  An  Outline  of  Christian   Theology  (New  York,  1909),  p.  444.] The nature of the millennium was revised in increasingly ethical terms and transcendence even further removed, with an overall principle of natural continuity vying for dominance in the definition of the postmillennial vision. Moorhead writes,

>That perspective informed the dismissal of traditional "artificial" readings of prophecy; it motivated the rejection of apocalypticism and of the sharp dichotomies between the lost and the saved, heaven and hell, time and eternity; and it lay behind faith in a Kingdom of God advancing by rational planning. In a word, the erosion of postmillennialism was part of the waning of supernaturalism.^[Moorhead, Erosion, 76.]

By the end of the century, postmillennialism achieved a virtual hegemony on the Protestant American grasp of the future, yet moves to erode and revise in light of modernist theology began to chip away at the fullness of the doctrine. These shifts would not take effect at once, but within a matter of decades these revisions would untangle the position and by the 1930s lead to its widespread dismissal.^[Moorhead, Erosion, 61 takes as his thesis the slow decline of postmillennialism after the Civil War, noting that it would move from the solid majority position to virtually dismissed by the 1930s. Though the seeds of this erosion emerged in the academy in the decades after the Civil War, it would take the turmoil of the Fundamentalist and Modernist controversies at the end of the Progressive era to unseat postmillennialism, or some adjusted version, from its position.] Nevertheless, a solid belief in a immanent period of social peace and prosperity, a millennial reign, buoyed the American Protestant mission and instilled a solid faith in progress in the Progressive Era.

The first half of the nineteenth century witnessed the crystallization of a majority Protestant view in favor of postmillennialism. Davidson writes, ""By the 1820s the perspective had changed considerably. Postmillennialism had become a well-established, coherent position..."^[Davidson, 270.] The events that transpired over the course of the century only increased the dominance of the postmillennial position. By the last half of the century, postmillennialism was assumed for most Protestants, reaching the level of a theological presupposition upon which rested the applied theology of the era. Though the last decades of the nineteenth century witnessed adjustments in the nature of the millennium, largely through the impact of an ethical understanding of the kingdom, Protestants nevertheless fought to do their part in ushering in the millennial prosperity. This dominance gave Brown the confidence to write only a few decades later of how the majority of the Church, "looks for a future period of prosperity, preceding the second advent of Christ."^[Brown, Millennium, Dictionary, 373.] Though only one of many presuppositions, postmillennialism shaded both the theological questions and answers as the Gilded Age and Progressive Era approached.

# Presupposition 2: American Protestant Kingdom Theology
On a winter day in December, 1870, students entered a lecture hall at Andover Theological Seminary to hear a series of lectures by Samuel Harris, then president of Bowdoin College. This lecture series would later be published as a book under the title, _The Kingdom of Christ on Earth_. If postmillennialism addressed the manner in which this kingdom would come, then kingdom theology provided an understanding of its nature and means. As the Gilded Age gained steam, postmillennial optimism and European influence fueled a renewed zeal in the kingdom of God, a factor that would weigh heavy in the formation of applied theology and missionary methods toward immigrants in the decades to come.

Near the beginning of his first lecture, Harris sets the tone and trajectory, claiming:

> This interest in Jesus is not speculative, but practical, pertaining to him as the world's Redeemer and King. The idea of his kingdom on earth, and the expectation of its progress and triumph in fulfillment of the prophecy and promise of the gospel, have become familiar elements of human thought and determinant forces in human action. The sublime idea of the conversion of the world to Christ has become so common as to cease to awaken wonder. Its realization is the object throughout Christendom of systematic, persistent, and energetic action, and elicits every year heroic consecration and self-sacrifice. The prayer, “Thy kingdom come,” is perpetually offered.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 2.]

In these opening remarks, Harris makes several significant assertions about the kingdom of God. He states that the conversion of the world is the aim of the kingdom and that these are the purposes for which missionary activity and human effort are working. Furthermore, he notes that this view had become "so common as to cease to awaken wonder."^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 2.] In the remaining twelve lectures, Harris lays out the end and means of the kingdom of God, a whole world turned into a Christian society through the efforts of Christian ministry and missionary enterprise.

Harris was a prolific figure at the close of the nineteenth century. A graduate of Bowdoin College and Andover Seminary, at the time of these lectures he served as the president of the former and guest lectured at the latter. A theologian by training, Harris would serve the bulk of his career as the Dwight Professor of Systematic Theology at Yale, filling the role for twenty-five years.^[Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 82.] Harris wrote several works of theology, but the kingdom lectures at Andover provide his most comprehensive work on the kingdom of God and constitute an exhaustive treatment of both pure and applied theological exhortations to the students at the seminary.

If the orator of these lectures was notable, the setting was perhaps more so. Founded in 1808 as a result of theological downgrade at Harvard due to encroaching Unitarianism, Andover Theological Seminary played a major role in the development of American Protestant thought.^[Caldwell, New England's New Divinity and the Age of Judson's Preparation, 31. Though, there has to be a more direct source for this one!] The school was birthed out of a desire to maintain orthodox doctrine, and like so many other aspects of American Protestantism, the pervasive influence of Jonathan Edwards could be felt in the establishment of Andover. Various connections to New Divinity thought existed in many of the founding figures, such as Leonard Woods, Moses Stuart, and Edward Dorr Griffin, ensuring those taught at Andover would be no strangers to the concept of postmillennialism.^[Caldwell, New England's New Divinity, 38.]

Andover Seminary was the first graduate seminary founded in North America, and it went on to train many of the nation's ministers and missionaries over the next century. Leonard Woods, who held the Abbott Professorship of Christian Theology, writes in his  _History of the Andover Theological Seminary_, "For ten years all who were sent out by the American Board, except one, were educated here. And in thirty eight years, above a hundred went from this Theological School [sic] to preach the gospel to the unevangelized."^[Woods, History of Andover, 199-200.] In this setting, Samuel Harris, himself, had received a portion of his formative theological training. 

Furthermore, in 1870 Andover had a made a name for itself among Protestant Americans and largely enjoyed a reputation of excellence.^[`FIND POTENTIAL CITATON`] Like the rest of Protestant America, Andover would soon see conflict concerning theological convictions. A mere decade after Harris delivered his lectures on the kingdom of God, the Andover Controversy would begin to take shape. A rift developed between those who would hold the seminary to its founding doctrines and a new class of faculty that wanted to promote "Progressive Orthodoxy" that imbibed evolutionary thought and exalted human progress as a central tenant of the gospel.^[Whitlock, L. G., Jr. “Andover Controversy.” Evangelical Dictionary of Theology, 59. `Do I find a way here to point back to Woods' prophetic warnings about the orthodoxy of the institution? Do I save that for a chapter on the influence of Social Sciences and evolutionary thought? Since this chapter section is about kingdom theology, perhaps that waits for a further explanation elsewhere.`] In this regard, Andover's own conflict served as a microcosm of shifts in Protestant thought during the Gilded Age. Harris's lectures, in many ways, foreshadow much of the later development in the coming decades.

Harris's kingdom lectures serve as a prime example concerning theological presuppositions that would give birth to a particular applied theology and eventual missionary methods toward immigrants. In the beginning years of the Gilded Age, Harris stood before a room full of the very men who would lead churches into the Progressive Era in American history. Immigration to the United States had peaked before, but in the coming decades America would see a surge of immigrants unlike any previous moment in its history. The topic of these lectures was by no means inconsequential. As discussed above, postmillennialism had risen to the level of theological presupposition among American Protestants at the end of the nineteenth century, a point Harris proves at length in his lectures. However, a commitment to postmillennialism naturally leads to concern for the nature and means of the kingdom that stands as the object of this eschatological hope. Harris dedicates twelve lectures to just that topic.

## A Preoccupation with the Kingdom
As with millennial speculation, talk of the kingdom was a frequent occurrence during the last half of the nineteenth century.^[Evans, Social Gospel in American Religion, 6, 60. See also Handy, A Christian America, 87.] In his opening remarks, Harris points to the regularity with which the kingdom was addressed, saying, "The idea of his kingdom on earth, and the expectation of its progress and triumph in fulfillment of the prophecy and promise of the gospel, have become familiar elements of human thought..."^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 2.] The kingdom was truly a favorite topic of conversation, and with postmillennial optimism as the mainstream, questions of progress and triumph were central to the concerns of Gilded Age kingdom theology. Belief that Americans were living at the dawn of the kingdom of Christ on earth incited much discussion about the nature and means of that kingdom and became the foundation for the development of particular missionary methods in the decades to come.

Talk of the millennium required talk of the kingdom of God in some sense. The very same periodicals filled with millennial speculation necessarily had to speak of its nature.^[See Millennial Habringer. `AND FIND OTHERS... there were several examples with millennial even in the title`] This was true regardless of one's stance on the millennium, whether premillennial or postmillennial. However, the ideas concerning the kingdom and how it was to come about varied greatly depending on one's convictions concerning the timing of the millennium.^[Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 34-35.] While adherents to premillennial eschatology were generally pessimistic regarding the trajectory of society, the majority American Protestant commitment toward postmillennialism lended naturally toward a progressive, optimistic kingdom theology.^[Danner, Dan G. (1999)]

A generation prior to the Gilded Age, Alexander Campbell demonstrated the natural relationship between millennialism and a progressive kingdom theology. Speaking to Campbell's conception of the kingdom, Danner writes, "For Campbell, the world was getting better; scriptures were being spread; science, education, agriculture, commerce, and nature all were combining to bring on a better day. A new political, moral, and religious revolution was fast advancing..."^[Danner, Dan G. (1999)] In the introductory prospectus to his journal,  _The Millennial Harbinger_, Campbell provides his purpose for starting it. He writes, "It shall have for its object the development [sic], and introduction of that political and religious order of society called THE MILLENNIUM [sic], which will be the consummation of that ultimate amelioration of society proposed in the Christian Scriptures."^[Campbell, Alexander, and Charles Louis Loos. The Millennial Harbinger. Bethany, VA: W.K. Pendleton, 1830, xv.] In his writings, Campbell was as concerned about espousing a theology of the kingdom as he was on persuading toward a particular timeline for the millennium. Tuveson notes that Campbell went further than most millennialists in his time by transferring the focus of redemption onto the world rather than the individual.^[Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 81.] In this regard, Campbell's understanding of the kingdom was a precursor to the view that would become popular after Harris at the turn of the century.

The reverse concern was also true. For Harris to promote his view of the kingdom, it required a postmillennial commitment. We see this in the prominence he gives to defending the postmillennial position. In the introduction to his defense of postmillennialism, Harris writes, "The millenarian [premillennial] error is essentially this: The dispensation of the Spirit under which we live is not intended to secure the gradual extension and ultimate triumph of the kingdom; the preaching of the gospel to every creature is not intended to convert the world, but to be a witness to all nations.."^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 220.] In essence, Harris claims the primary foible of the millenarian position is that it does not adhere to the vision of kingdom theology he espouses. The majority American Protestant understanding of postmillennialism and a kingdom theology that was progressive and optimistic were intrinsically linked; however, they were not the same doctrine.

Despite the large amount of overlapping territory between the doctrine of the millennium and the doctrine of the kingdom, sufficient distinction exists to consider them separate aspects of a system. Postmillennialism and the kingdom of God accomplished different but complementary roles in a holistic view of eschatology, and hence of mission, for the majority view among Protestant Americans. Kingdom theology essentially filled in the container provided by postmillennialism. If the latter provided a telos, or end goal, then the former filled in the details of that goal. The kingdom of God spoke to the nature of their goal, what they were working to achieve, and the means to their goal, through what kind of initiative it could be accomplished. This eschatological system, comprised of mutually reinforcing commitments to postmillennialism and a particular theology of the kingdom, played a major role in shaping the applied theology for mission.^[Handy, A Christian America, 85 notes this connection in Harris concerning the kingdom and his millennial expectations, and he also underscores the significance of postmillennialism for the broader Protestant American worldview.]

Over the course of his twelve lectures, Harris interacts with the kingdom of God from every conceivable angle. In his first lectures, he demonstrates proofs for the existence of the kingdom and antagonism toward the kingdom as Satanic forces.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 1,22. Consider adding lecture names to the footnotes.] He continues by describing the unique virtues of the kingdom (lecture 3), bound up in sacrificial love (lecture 7).^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 47, 129.] He outlines the necessity of both divine (lecture 4) and human agency (lecture 6) in the triumph of the kingdom.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 65, 110.] In lecture 11, Harris pits the "scriptural doctrine of the triumph of Christ's kingdom" against millenarianism, forcefully defending the doctrine of postmillennialism.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 220.] Finally, Harris addresses the relationship between human progress, civilization, and the kingdom of God in lectures 10 and 12.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 199, 238.] In total, Harris's lectures provide a fully comprehensive theology of the kingdom that serves, in many ways, as a bridge between more traditional understandings of the kingdom of God and a developing understanding, largely influenced by European thought, that would ground much of the applied theology by Protestants for the next four decades.

`Note:  
May need to quote the dialectical bridge language here... or at least give it a footnote on something I've alread said.
He was moreover to be a link between the "dialectical" theology and the "modern," which stresses action over systematic completeness.^[ Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 82.]`

## The European Conversation
As with postmillennialism, many other aspects of American Protestant theology were developed in conversation with concurrent discussions in Western Europe, especially Great Britain. Kingdom theology was no exception. American thoughts on the kingdom of God were heavily influenced by those in Europe, and reliance on certain scholars is evident.

F.D. Maurice is one such scholar whose theology played an outsized role in what became the majority understanding of the kingdom in American Protestantism at the turn of the century. One of the more prominent theologians in the Church of England during his time, Maurice was both a committed progressive postmillennialist and had much to say about the kingdom as a result.^[Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 75.] Maurice is perhaps best known for his role in the development of Christian Socialism in Europe, which eventually emerged in its American form as Social Christianity.

Maurice's work gave rise to Christian Socialism in the 1840s and 1850s in England. His work was accompanied by the writings and sermons of others such as John Malcom Forbes and Frederick Robertson during those decades. However, a second wave of scholarship in the 1880s expanded on the concepts of Christian Socialism.^[Phillip, A Kingdom on Earth, xiv.]

Maurice's initial work on the topic,  _Kingdom of Christ_, was published in 1838 and the result of a series of Anglican tracts written to dialogue with Quakers. In it, Maurice laid out several significant theological concepts concerning the Kingdom of God. He believed that the New Jerusalem was, in fact, realizable. Speaking of Maurice, Phillips writes,

> The Kingdom was the community of righteousness about to be established upon earth. It was not an idealized target never fully to be attained in this life but rather a real, living, and fully functioning community that would be realized through the social application of Christ's teachings. According to Social Christians, the historical completion of the Christianizing of communities was imminent. It was the expression of God's mission to humanity, the fulfillment of the Incarnation.'^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 1.]

For Maurice, the social perfection of the kingdom was an attainable goal, and one that could be accomplished though socially attainable means.

`Paragraph: 
Quotes from Maurice demonstrating the above paragraph.I probably need to grab some original source quotes from Maurice's book. If I need to, I can find page numbers in Phillips to do so.`

Though Maurice died in 1872, his legacy of Christian Socialism thrived into the 1880s in Britain. It was during this time that the movement gained the most momentum. Those involved in this fresh expression of Christian Socialism saw themselves as the heirs of Maurice's legacy.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, xxv. `I need some kind of explainer footnote here.`] Phillips writes about the era,

> The mixture of secular social conscience and Social Christianity was present both in Britain and America at this time. The spark that initiated so much concern and activity on behalf of the distressed, laboring masses is still not clear. But the impulse unleashed both Social Christianity and general political and social reformism for decades to come.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, xxiv.]

As noted by Phillips, this movement would also make an impression on American Protestant thought concerning the kingdom of God.

Christian Socialism in England was not the only influence on kingdom theology coming from Europe. German scholarship during the era also played a significant role in the formation of the American Protestant vision for the kingdom of God. The most significant voices coming from Germany were those of Albrecht Ritschl and Adolf von Harnack.^[Evans, The Social Gospel in American Religion, 60. See also Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 11 and Handy, A Christian America, 87.] In 1898, Stuckenberg writes,

> To Ritschl belongs the credit for giving prominence to the kingdom of God, which had long been neglected by theologians. The prominence given to this subject almost warrants us in calling his system the theology of the kingdom.^[Stuckenberg, 286.]

Ritschl (1822-89) taught systematic theology at Göttingen, influencing many subsequent scholars in the German Protestant academy. Of those influenced by Ritschl, Rudolf Hermann Lotze and Adolf von Harnack also made significant contributions to this developing theology of the kingdom. Each of these three men taught a relatively large number of Americans coming to Germany for graduate studies.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 11.]

Ritschl's school of thought was essentially a rejection of Hegelian rationalism.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 11.] In his early instruction, Ritschl was heavily influence by the Tubingen school, studying under Baur, but his tenure in this school of thought was short lived. Becoming convinced their basis in speculation was false, he refuted their position in his own scholarship.^[Stuckenberg, J. H. W. “The Theology of Albrecht Ritschl.” The American Journal of Theology 2.2 (1898): 271.] Instead, Ritschl stressed a more immanent, experiential, and pragmatic concept of Christianity. Much like Schleiermacher before him, Ritschl placed weight on religious experience as the test of Christianity's authenticity.^[Evans, Social Gospel in American Religion, 60.] Furthermore, he rejected any attempts at rationalistic proofs of Christianity.^[`FIND THE RIGHT SOURCE FOR THIS.`] These convictions led Ritschl and his associates to focus on ethical and moral experience in their understanding of theology in general and the kingdom of God in specific.

The result of Ritschl's thought was a total reconstruction of orthodox doctrines of Christology, soteriology, ecclesiology, anthropology, and ultimately eschatology. Ritschl redefines the divine relationship of Christ to God the Father as one not of substance but disposition.^[Stuckenberg, 278.] In this way, Christ's position as the one to usher in the kingdom makes him unique, but his moral character is attainable by all humanity and all can obtain this same kind of divinity.^[Stuckenberg, 279.] Ritschl denies original sin, claiming that our nature does not make sin inevitable.^[Stuckenberg, 284.] Therefore, the doctrine of atonement is no longer necessary.^[Stuckenberg, 280.] Though sin is not inherited, it appears universal. Humanity's real problem is ignorance of the good. In this way, the kingdom of sin reigns. Christ, in his selflessness, reveals a better way and humanity's salvation is found in their selfless subjugation of their will to the divine will. In this way can humanity usher in the kingdom of God.^[Stuckenberg, 284.]

The pinnacle of Ritschl's theology is found in his conception of the kingdom of God. The kingdom is the highest good; the hub around which the spokes of Ritshl's theology are anchored. The kingdom is not the church, though both are necessary. Each occupies a different sphere for Ritschl, and each has distinct functions. The church is the sphere of worship, while the kingdom is the sphere of Christian moral action.^[Stuckenberg, 288.]

`I still need direct quotes from Ritschl. I can get those out of Stuckenberg. But, I also need to sprinkle in other sources on Ritschl's theology.`

Building off of Ritschl's thought, von Harnack made a lasting impact on Protestant conceptions of the early Christian church. Harnack, like many other liberal German theologians of the era, was convinced the essence of Christianity was to be found in the teachings of Jesus and that the later teachings of the New Testament had reinterpreted these. Von Harnack warned against an overemphasis by the Western church on the teachings of Paul and created a wedge between the earlier teachings of Jesus and the later teachings of Paul.^[Evans, Social Gospel in American Religion, 61.] As Evans writes,

> Both Ritschl and von Harnack's understanding of Christianity shifted the interpretation of the New Testament away from an otherworldly understanding of Jesus's message, instead emphasizing the significance of his teachings the realization of a new kingdom in this world.^[Evans, Social Gospel in American Religion, 61.]

In the Ritschlian school, American Protestants would find a theological foundation for a kingdom of God that was entirely immanent, and a means of securing it through ethical and social activity.

## An American Adaptation
An ocean away, Protestant ministers and theologians in the United States were in the midst of a similar conversation concerning the nature and means of the kingdom. While it must be noted that cultural and circumstantial similarities existed between European and American Protestants, it is insufficient to assign coincidence as the driving force behind the concurrence of dialogue about kingdom theology. These were not two separate but coincidental developments. A history of shared interaction on the nature of means of the kingdom demonstrates an American reliance on the European conversation.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, xxvi, 19, repeatedly references correspondence with or citation of European theologians concerning issues of social Christianity. On page 11, Phillips notes that many Americans went to Germany to study directly under Ritschl and von Harnack. See also Handy, A Christian America, 87, where he notes the number of Americans who studied in Germany under these men and Handy, Undermined Establishment, 59, where he generally asserts a strong reliance by American Protestants on Christian Socialism from England in developing the American Protestant versions of social Christianity.] A brief examination demonstrates the relationship between European scholarship and presuppositions developing in the United States among Protestants concerning the kingdom of God. As noted above, the majority of American Protestants were increasingly committed to a postmillennial eschatology. This prior commitment proved fertile ground for an optimistic and immanent vision of the kingdom that could be established through human initiative.

Though American Protestants were less likely to use the term Christian Socialist, the ideas of F.D. Maurice plainly influenced the development of kingdom theology in the United States. A clear reliance on Maurice is evident for some of the most influential American Protestants during the end of the nineteenth century. Richard Ely, an Episcopal lay leader and economist, made a tremendous impact on the spread of social Christianity, and like many others, Ely was influenced by the parallel movement occurring in England.^[Handy, Undermined Establishment, 61-62.] Washington Gladden, labeled by many as the father of the American Social Gospel movement, wrote of Maurice, "Thy gentleness hath made me great."^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 18.  `Find original source in Phillips.`]

Perhaps none are so clearly tied to Maurice's influence, though, as Horace Bushnell, the noted Congregational minister and theologian. Bushnell shared Maurice's optimism concerning humanity, and believed morality was the result of social evolution.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 5.] Like Maurice, Bushnell was a polarizing and often controversial figure. Phillips notes that both Maurice and Horace Bushnell were the targets of a good bit of controversy in their own generation, but both men seemed to enjoy a subsequent admiration of their thought in later decades. By the end of the nineteenth century, the Protestant mainstream more readily accepted their concepts concerning progress and the kingdom.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 4-6.] While the influence of both had a liberalizing tendency on Protestantism, most who advocated for Bushnell, or Maurice, did not claim to be liberal Protestants. Their appeal was broader than purely liberal corners of Protestantism, and their ideas pervaded in the fabric of developing theology on the kingdom of God.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 6, notes that many would defend Bushnell's conservative roots in order to advocate for his positions.]

Much like Maurice and the Christian Socialists of Britain, Ritschl's kingdom theology left it's mark in the United States. Evans writes, "One particular concept that would increasingly fascinate American Protestants was Ritschl's stress on the kingdom of God as a means of understanding the historical mission of Christianity as a religious movement."^[Evans, Social Gospel in America, 60.] Ritschl's ideas were especially significant among American liberals. Hutchison claims Ritschl was the primary player in German influence on American Protestant theology after 1890.^[Hutchison, The Modernist Impulse in American Protestantism, 122-32.  `Find the exact page... after you find the source!`] By the time the social gospel emerged as a full-blown movement, almost all of its leaders had leaned on Ritschl for aspects of their theology.^[Evans, Social Gospel in America, 61.] However, the effects of Ritschl on American kingdom theology surfaced both earlier and broader than the social gospel movement.^[Handy, Robert. A History of the Churches in the United States and Canada (New York: Oxford University Press, 1976), 287.]

The widespread commitment to postmillennialism proved fertile ground for Ritschl's kingdom theology. Ritchl's explanation of the kingdom nested nicely into the framework of an immanently approaching millennium, though it required removing an emphasis on supernatural and apocalyptic elements of the millennium in favor of an ethical conception of the kingdom.^[Quandt, Jean, Religion and Social Thought: The Secularization of Postmillennialism, American Quarterly 25.4 (1973): 390–409. pg 391, demonstrates the adaptation of postmillennialism that occurred in the final decades of the nineteenth century to adjust both for modernist theology and social scientific developments during the era.] The kingdom became a present, ethical reality instead of a coming apocalyptic society. The postmillennial optimism adjusted further still to rest on laws of evolution and growth for a gradual advance of society into this moralized understanding of the kingdom.^[Moorhead, James H. “The Erosion of Postmillennialism in American Religious Thought, 1865-1925. Church Hist. 53.1 (1984), 66 notes the effects of Ritschl's expression of the kingdom on the American Protestant commitment to postmillennialism. He claims Ritschl was an outsized influence on the development of the doctrine in America around the turn of the century.]]

If American Protestants were tasked with ushering in the kingdom, then Ritschl gave shape to this idea for many, even if they did not know the concepts were gleaned from German liberal theology. As the nineteenth century moved through its final decades, many found appealing Ritschl's propensity for linking religion and civilization as twin engines of progress and advancing the kingdom.^[Handy, A Christian America, 87.] Handy notes that even as the emerging liberal segments within evangelicalism were elevating Ritschl's concepts of the kingdom to a central place in their own theology, they were doing so in broad language that could, and would, be easily accepted by a much wider spectrum of Protestants.^[Handy, A Christian America, 87.]

Samuel Harris is one such example. Handy writes, "Such men as Harris and others like him were not crusading for liberalism but were trying to state views that represented an evangelical consensus."^[Handy, A Christian America, 87.] Evangelicals across a broad spectrum in America were gaining interest in the doctrine of the kingdom of God, because certain kingdom theologies provided a pathway for the discussion of the church's role in civilization.^[Handy, A Christian America, 84, 87.] Harris writes,

> The idea of a kingdom of God on earth and the prophecy of its realization are present in modern thought and among the forces that determine modern progress and civilization. The idea is so complete as a solution of the problem of man’s history and destiny, so sufficient, if realized, to constitute the perfection and blessedness of society, and as a conception of the ways of God with man so comprehensive and sublime, that in itself it demonstrates that it is from God.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 18.]

Harris himself was a committed postmillennialist and he spoke confidently of the complete Christianization of society.^[Handy, A Christian America, 86.]

Though not directly promoting a theologically liberal Protestant vision, Harris was nevertheless influenced by key aspects of European liberal theology on the nature and means of the kingdom. Tuveson writes of Harris, "He was moreover to be a link between the 'dialectical' theology and the 'modern,' which stresses action over systematic completeness."^[Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 82] Handy notes a dependence by Harris on Bushnell, which exhibited a heavy reliance on Maurice and Christian Socialism.^[Handy, A Christian America, 85.] Furthermore, Harris's kingdom lectures demonstrate a reliance on theological concepts popularized through the work of Ritschl and von Harnack. Even if Harris would reject many of Ritschl's claims on doctrines such as the nature of Christ and the need for atonement, he was conversant in Ritschl's kingdom language. Throughout his kingdom lectures, Harris borrows on the kingdom shorthand coined by von Harnack concerning the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 2, 13.] In his introductory lecture, Harris makes the claim:

> Besides this direct interest in the conversion of the world, modern civilization is characterized by ideas derived from the gospel of the kingdom; the brotherhood of man and the fatherhood of God; philanthropy; the promise of human progress; the rights of man; the removal of oppression; the reign of justice and love displacing the reign of force.^[Harris, A Kingdom on Earth, 2.]

For this understanding, Harris and other American Protestants were indebted to Ritschl and von Harnack.

#### The Result: A Social Christianity?
Unlike England and other regions of Europe, the term Christian Socialist was not widely and consistently received in the United States. Initially intended by Maurice as a specifically religious moniker, as opposed to creating ties toward a political philosophy, he eventually refuted the term himself. In the United States, the term fell largely out of favor with the majority of Protestants and became associated with a more radical fringe and carried a hint of militancy.^[Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, xvi] Instead, the term social Christianity gained favor around the year 1880 and enjoyed increased usage through the turn of the century.^[`Do I cite NGram here? If so, how?`]

In  _The Social Gospel in America, 1870-1920_, Handy writes:

> ... the designation most widely used was "social Christianity." The new term came to be applied chiefly to a particular kind of protestant social concern. There was, on the one hand, a social Christianity which was cast in a "conservative mold." Its exponents recognized social problems but sought to deal with them without sharply challenging the dominant individualism... At the other extreme were those who tended to reject existing social and economic institutions in favor of sweeping reconstruction.^[Handy, The Social Gospel in America, 5.]

After the turn of the century, "social gospel" would increasingly become a watchword, and by the 1920s it would strain the fabric of Protestant America. However, the concepts of social Christianity were prior to and broader than the social gospel movement that it would produce and served as an umbrella for Protestant social concern. By the 1890s, Social Christianity played a significant role in the life of most major Protestant denominations.^[Handy, Undermined Establishment, 58-59.]

Though many American Protestants were swept up into progressive politics, and the movement itself mostly consisted of evangelical Protestants, not all who were influenced by social Christian concepts could be labeled political progressives. The idea of social Christianity was even broader still.^[Handy, Undermined Establishment, 104.] In the decades prior to the turn of the century, the question was not primarily one of theological liberalism or conservatism as it would later become. In  _Protestant Churches and Industrial America_, Henry May provides a nuanced framework that explains the multivalent nature of social Christianity. May writes,

> Naturally, preachers of social Christianity spoke in different terms, influenced by various theologies, reaching different diagnoses for the ills of society. They shared, however, two characteristics: all were moved by a sense of social crisis, and all believed in the necessity and possibility of a Christian solution."^[May, Protestant Church and Industrial America, 163.]

The social Christian movement, as defined by May, contained three primary strands: conservative, progressive, and radical social Christianity during the end of the nineteenth century.

May's categories do not align neatly with theological distinctions, even during the era in discussion. Handy notes, however, that May's conservative strand of social Christianity consisted of churches and individuals who continued to identify as conservative evangelical Protestants. Most of these stayed within their existing denominational framework, and supported socially oriented home missions and rescue mission efforts.^[Handy, Undermined Establishment, 105. See also May, Protestant Churches and Industrial America, 163-169 and Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, xvii.] The radical strand was essentially a fringe, largely rejected by American Protestants, who were proponents of radical restructuring and socialist positions. The middle, or progressive strand, essentially became the social gospel movement of later decades.^[May, Protestant Churches and Industrial America, 170-181.] Despite the problems inherent in classifying the spectrum of approaches to social Christianity, May's framework demonstrates a narrow or fringe understanding of social Christianity does not represent the extent to which issues of social concern and activity became embedded in the Protestant conversation of the church's mission. At the end of the nineteenth century, most Protestant Americans knew it was their job to do something to shape the course of human civilization.

From the 1880s onward, social Christianity worked its way into the fabric of American Protestantism and shaped the contours of Christian mission. Relating this to kingdom theology, Handy writes,

> The kingdom idea was in many respects a spiritualized and idealized restatement of the search for a specifically Christian society in an age of freedom and progress. Protestants with somewhat different theological perspectives concerning the kingdom of God could nevertheless find sufficient in common to work together for its coming.^[Handy, A Christian America, 87.]

Since it was too soon to speak of a liberal and evangelical divide, broad tenets of social Christianity developed into a presupposition for most American Protestants. The uptick in social Christianity during the era was a major factor in the way churches related to the state. There was an increased sense of significance among American Protestant church people concerning public issues that make this period in church history unique.^[Handy, Undermined Establishment, 10.] Even those that May would list as conservative evangelical members of the social Christian movement claimed hope at the Christianization of America.^[May, Protestant Churches and Industrial America, 165, details the positions of Joseph Cook, who popularized the phrase, "Only the Golden Rule can bring the golden age." Cook was speaking of the need for voluntary Christianization instead of governmental or policy action to address situations concerning wealth disparity. See also, Cook, Labor, 241.] Furthermore, the Americanization of Christianity was of concern to both conservative evangelicals and adherents of the social gospel alike.

# Christianize and Civilize
The final two decades of the nineteenth century proved an exciting and tumultuous time in American history. On the heels of an industrial revolution, urbanization was in full swing and populations began to explode. By 1900, in New York City alone, the population was the same size as the total urban population of the country in 1850 at 3.4 million people. ^[Boyer, Paul, Urban Masses and Moral Order in America, 1820-1920 (Boston: Harvard University Press, 2009), 123.  `consider stuffing. These first two footnotes may need to carry a good bit of research on the social setting, since I deal with it little in the paper`} The Westward expansion of the United States was in full swing, and beginning in the 1880s a swelling wave of immigration landed on American shores, only cresting after the turn of the century.^[Zolberg, Aristide, A Nation by Design: Immigration Policy in the Fashioning of America (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2006), 204-205 notes that the United States was the global leader in immigration during the era, receiving six times as many immigrants as the next highest recipient.  `Consider stuffing this with other sources`] Exciting times are, however, tumultuous times. Industrialization, urbanization, and immigration brought with them poor labor conditions, unsanitary living conditions, and the threat of unknown culture and worldview. The 1880s would see protests and riots over labor concerns such as the 1886 Haymarket Riot, where a bomb was detonated in Chicago.^[Boyer, Urban Masses and Moral Order, 126.] Not only would the sheer volume of immigration incite concern, but the particular composition of the "new immigration" during the era was much more diverse, pulling from non-Protestant countries in Eastern Europe and elsewhere.^[Zolberg, Aristide, A Nation by Design, 205.  `Consider also adding Latourette or other sources on the makeup of immigration during this era and show they were largely Catholic, Jewish, or nothing.`]

From 1880 to 1920, many Protestant Americans viewed their country as a paradox of great promise and potential peril. Riding on the wings of the modern missions movement, Protestants of the Gilded Age approached the promise and peril firmly convinced of their central role in God's plan for history. This confidence was a shaping factor in their development of an applied theology and specific missionary methods. To this unique missionary occasion most American Protestants brought theological presuppositions concerning postmillennialism and an over-realized version of the kingdom of God.

## A Postmilliennial Commitment

A postmillennialist commitment presented as optimism in the overall direction of society. For most Protestants things were getting better, even if the current perils evidenced a momentary or potential setback in the war against the kingdom of sin. Moorhead writes,

**FIX QUOTE!**

> They [postmillennialits] often asserted that the tokens of that... history would spiral upward by the orderly continuation of the same forces that had promoted revivals, made America the model republic, and increased material prosperity.Moorhead, Between Progress, 525.]

American Protestants of many stripes believed the present world would be transformed into a society of perfect righteousness and peace through Christianity's triumph. In the first decades of the nineteenth century, the consensus was that this victorious outpouring would occur through the work of revivals. The middle decades of the century, during the Civil War and early parts of Reconstruction tampered this faith, only to have it return in the Gilded Age as Americans headed into their Progressive Era. An optimism initially placed on the work of revivals was increasingly transferred to activities such as social reform.Phillips, A Kingdom on Earth, 5-6.]

Postmillennialism always held to a gradual development of the kingdom of God; however, as the Gilded Age gave way to the Progressive Era, the spirit of the age weighed heavily on the Protestant American understanding of how this would unfold. Tuveson writes,

> "The notion of history as a process generally moving upwards by a series of majestic stages, culminating inevitably in some great, transforming event which is to solve the dilemmas of society–that is the concept destined to dominate "modern" thought.Tuveson, Millennium and Utopia, 75.]

As an example, Moorhead notes this influence as early as Harris' kingdom lectures. Moorhead writes,

> Firmly committed to the belief that progress was the law of time and believing that the United States was playing a special role in that improvement, he could tolerate no eschatology that suggested "a violent disruption of all the continuity of that history."Moorhead, Between Progress, 541.]

The wheels of progress, set in motion by God himself, would grind onward and upward establishing the kingdom in human civilization.

## An Over-realized Kingdom Theology

As postmillennialism accommodated to varying degrees the evolving concepts from European scholarship and new insights from the infant fields of social science, American Protestants held to a small list of irreducible assumptions about the kingdom of God that would guide their applied theology during the era. The means of the kingdom was no longer solely confined for most to the realm of spiritual outpouring and revival, and the nature of the kingdom increasingly mirrored the American society that was emerging around them.

Advocating for social and technological advance as agents of the kingdom were not new to the Gilded Age.Lyman Beecher, A Plea for the West, 9-10 if often cited as an early example of one who promotes the social and technological advances of the United States as unique in God's plan for world evangelization and the final realization of the kingdom of God. Beecher writes,But if it is by the march of revolution and civil liberty, that the way of the Lord is to be prepared, where shall the central energy be found, and from what nation shall the renovating power go forth? What nation is blessed with such experimental knowledge of free institutions, with such facilities and resources of communication, obstructed by so few obstacles, as our own?"] By the the 1870s, though, calls to celebrate human progress, social institutions, and technological advance as true agents of the millennium were commonplace.^[

Quandt, Religion and Social Thought, 392, notes that the most significant of these shifts was the convergence of millennial expectations with the celebration of civil institutions and technological developments and true agents in establishing the kingdom.] 

Historically, divine agency and human initiative were the twin edges of the scissors concerning the development of the kingdom. The classic explanation of these means adjusted with the new kingdom theology. In his kingdom lectures, Harris devotes two complete lectures to the divine agency and human initiative, claiming both are essential for the full realization of the kingdom.^[

Harris, Kingdom of Christ, lectures IV and VI take up the task of divine agency and human agency respectively in the establishment of the kingdom of Christ.]

Divine agency in advancing the kingdom, once primarily seen as the outpouring of the Holy Spirit through revival, was stretched to include the agency of God in establishing processes of progress. Harris speaks of the kingdom as a divine force. Harris writes,

> His kingdom is progressive, like the growth of a mustard-seed. Therefore the argument is as yet incomplete. But every new generation, and especially every epoch in human progress, adds to its force. Already it is possible from the study of human history to construct an argument that history itself demands for its rational explanation the presence and power of God in it as a Redeemer establishing his kingdom. When in the future the kingdom shall possess the earth, then history itself will have proved the truth of Christ's claims, and God’s redeeming grace and his kingdom will be as demonstrable from the facts of human history as the laws of astronomy are from the facts of the starry heavens.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 20.]

Henry Boynton Smith, a professor of theology at Union Theological Seminary, taught history as "the record of the progress of the kingdom of God, intermingling with and acting upon all the other interests of the human race, and shaping its destiny."^[Lewis French Stearns, Henry Boynton Smith (Boston, 1892), 158] The balance between spiritual outpouring and more naturalistic processes differed from scholar to scholar. Though increasingly, the focus was on divine agency through positivist understanding of history and faith in the direction of human civilization.

Likewise, the role of human agency in advancing the kingdom shifted for many during this era. Once primarily seen as the work of the redeemed in the propagation of the gospel to the heathen for the conversion of souls, human agency increasingly included civilization building, social action and education, and the establishment of environments that promoted Christian flourishing.^[Carey, William. An Enquiry Into the Obligations of Christians to Use Means for the Conversion of the Heathens. Leicester: Carey Kingsgate Press, 1792, as the classic example of human agency for the propagation of the gospel. See Strong, Josiah. Our Country: Its Possible Future and Its Present Crisis. New York: The Baker and Taylor Co., 1885 as a classic example of a social Christianity approach to human agency in kingdom building.] As with other aspects of American Protestant theology, a spectrum existed concerning the roles of human agency. For conservatives, the salvation of individual souls would eventually accumulate enough redeemed to change society. For liberal and social gospel adherents, social salvation through social means and social action accompanied, or overshadowed, any calls for conversion of individuals.^[Quandt, Religion and Social Thought, 396.] Regardless of tactics, both sides of the spectrum agreed on the nature of the kingdom, a leavening of society that would create a truly and thoroughly Christianized human civilization.

## Building America, Building the Kingdom

If the kingdom of God was to be the pinnacle of human civilization, American Protestants needed to look no further than the society developing around them to find it. Harris notes in his lectures that "modern civilization is characterized by ideas derived from the gospel of the kingdom."^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 2.] Of course, by modern civilization, Harris is referring to the ongoing American social experiment. Harris continues,

> ...from the day when he began to preach “The kingdom of heaven is at hand,” until now, his name has been a power in human thought and life; the kingdom has been in the world gathering individuals into itself, and vitalizing civilization with its divine ideas, a central force in the history of all enlightened and progressive nations.^[Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 19.]

In the minds of American Protestants, there was no more enlightened and progressive nation than their own. Western, specifically American, civilization was indeed becoming the kingdom of God. Theodore Munger, a Congregationalist theologian, emphatically preached that the kingdom had come, and it was presently at work in their society. Munger exhorts, "Let us not belittle this life. There is no moment of time grander than the present. The ages of eternity will usher in no day more momentous than those that are now passing..."^[Munger, Theodore Thornton. The Freedom of Faith (Boston, New York: Houghton, Mifflin and company, 1884), 33, 343.] The advancing kingdom is intrinsically linked to the development of modern Western culture, most specifically the American variety.

The United States as eschatological fulfillment was not a new concept in the Gilded Age. In his work,  _Thoughts on the Revival of Religion in New England, 1740_, Jonathan Edwards includes a chapter section titled, "Reasons for believing that the great work of God for the world's conversion may begin in America."^[Edwards, Jonathan. Thoughts on the Revival of Religion in New England, 1740: To Which Is Prefixed, A Narrative of the Surprising Work of God in Northampton, Mass., 1735 (New York: American Tract Society, 1899) 190.] Edwards serves as only one example of a long line of scholars, ministers, and lay people who looked to American society as the center of God's plans for his kingdom on earth.^[A comprehensive list of examples would, itself, be a book. A brief list of other notable figures which employed this millennial or kingdom language in relation to the United States includes: Lyman Beecher, A Plea for the West (Cincinnati: Truman & Smith, 1835), 10; Campbell, Alexander, The Millennial Harbinger (Bethany, VA: W.K. Pendleton, 1830); Josiah Strong, Our Country: Its Possible Future and Its Present Crisis (New York: The Baker and Taylor Co., 1885).] By the Gilded Age, this theme was so pronounced that it was noted a continent away. Lord Bryce, a British scholar, writing at the end of the 1880s claims,

> The whole matter may. I think, be summed up by saying that Christianity is in fact understood to be, though not the legally established religion, yet the national religion... They deem the general acceptance of Christianity to be one of the main sources of their national prosperity, and their nation a special object of Divine favour[sic].^[Bryce, James. The American Commonwealth. Vol. 2. (London: Macmillan and Co., 1889), 576-77.]

Distinctions between American civilization and a thoroughly Christian civilization were collapsed.

Christopher Richmann refers to this as the New Jerusalem theme prevalent in American exceptionalism. The New Jerusalem theme serves as shorthand for God's special presence and a particular eschatological vision. In this way, it expects both a space and a time. Richmann writes, "The notion appears in every genre and style imaginable: poetry, songs, presidential speeches, novels, political pamphlets, sermons, and academic writings... it has been a powerful force in American self-understanding and motivation."^[Richmann, America as New Jersusalem, 150.] As noted above, the postmillennial presupposition had long roots back into the very formation of the republic. Long had Protestant Americans wound the fate of American civil affairs around the fate of the millennium. As far back as the period between the Revolution and 1800, expectations of the millennium soared.^[Noll, The Search for Christian America, 113.]

In this way, millennialism served as a structuring narrative for the American Protestant worldview that conflated the biblical mission of the church with the task of promoting the American way of life. Rogers writes,

> As a result, millennial narratives became megaphones accentuating the importance of certain themes and threats. First, the superiority of the Anglo-American evangelical way of life was affirmed. Although the millennium was a global event, all Christian societies would not contribute equally to its attainment. American evangelicals concluded that an Anglo-American alliance would be the primary instrument carrying the gospel to the whole world... Moreover, the United States was seen as particularly blessed because God chose to start the spread of civil and religious liberty here.^[Rogers, Bright and New, 56.] 

Rising to the level of structuring narrative, Protestants filtered the world around them through the lens created by postmillennialism and an over-realized kingdom theology. All circumstances were eventually marshalled as evidence that America was where the kingdom would start. Protestants could point to increase in population, wealth, industry, and technology as sure signs that the age was dawning. In his kingdom lectures, Harris would affirm the central role of Anglo, specifically American, culture. He writes, "To the English-speaking people more than to any other the world is now indebted for the propagation of Christian ideas and Christian civilization."^[Harris, Kingdom on Christ, 255.]

When American civilization was equated with the kingdom, it had to be spread alongside the gospel. It also had to be defended from the threats of the kingdom of sin and Satan that would seek to overthrow the coming kingdom. The watch words of the modern missions movement for many were Christianize and Civilize.^[Bebbington, The Dominance of Evangelicalism, 141-142.] And while that might be true overseas, back at home, in the face of incoming millions, it quickly became Christianize and Americanize. American Protestants saw their mission as both promoting and protecting the establishment of this new society, and the great wave of immigration proved both opportunity and threat.

## Missions Methods toward Immigrants from 1880-1920
In 1987 Paul Hiebert penned an influential article titled  _Critical Contextualization_  in the International Bulletin on Missionary Research. In that article, Hiebert outlines a spectrum of contextualization methods through the history of the modern missions movement. Hiebert labels a period from 1800 to 1950 as the Era of Noncontextualization, arguing that a significant shift occurred in Protestant missions due to a change in theological, historical, and social scientific presupposition by Protestants during the era.^[Hiebert, Paul G. “Critical Contextualization.” International Bulletin of Missionary Research (1987): 104–12. pg 104.] This resulted in an approach to missions which required the complete deconstruction of a person's existing culture and a replacement with Western culture as part of the conversion to Christianity. Hiebert writes, "Consequently, the gospel was seen by the people as a foreign gospel. To become Christian one had to accept not only Christianity but also Western cultural ways."^[Hiebert, Critical Contextualization, 104.] The wave of immigration to the United States that occurred from 1880-1920 happened at the very height of Hiebert's era of noncontextualization. Though Hiebert's categories were intended to critique international missions practice in other countries, the same presuppositions which undergirded international missionary practice applied to home missions when it came to foreign immigrants.

### The Missionary Occassion

The swell of immigration straddling the turn of the nineteenth century produced an obvious missionary occasion for Protestant Americans. In the years between 1881 and 1910, immigration brought more than 17.7 million people to American shores.^[Roger Daniels, Coming to America: A History of Immigration and Ethnicity in American Life (New York: Harper Collins, 1990), 124.] The peak crested in 1907 as 1.29 million immigrants landed on American shores.^[Rasenberger, America, 1908, 17.] Furthermore, unlike previous decades of immigration, this new wave brought with it an increasing number of peoples from different cultural and religious backgrounds. Many new immigrants arrived from southern and eastern Europe, and their reception was not as warm. By this time, urbanization had transformed the American landscape and its major cities were in the fastest growth swing they would ever see. Immigrants disproportionately landed in these cities, clustering in residential areas around industrial centers. Cultural barriers were greater for this new wave, and therefore, their presence presented a more jarring impact on the American social fabric.^[Dublin, Thomas. Immigrant Voices: New Lives in America, 1773-1986 (University of Illinois Press, 1993), 12.] Furthermore, a much larger number of these immigrants were not Protestant.^[Need to Cite that they were Jewish and Catholic from some source.] This occasion, or crisis as many would claim, gave rise to missionary methods based on their theological presuppositions concerning their role in building the kingdom.

### Americanization as Part of the Biblical Mission

In short, making disciples also meant making Americans. The two ideas could not be easily separated. For some Protestants, it was an explicit connection and for others only assumed in their practices. By 1908, Israel Zangwill would produce and stage his play entitled  _The Melting Pot,_  coining a term that would typify the American experience for many. However, despite it's widespread use today to refer to American diversity, the original play underscored the ability of America to successfully assimilate foreigners into their own culture and society. The storyline was about a Russian-Jewish immigrant that discovered how to blend into American culture and assimilate. At the time, the play was lauded for its example by none other than Theodore Roosevelt, the current president.^[Rasenberger, America 1908, 237.] The pressure to assimilate to the majority Anglo Western culture of the United States was broad, and American Protestant missions would largely adopt this assumption with ample theological justification.

Noll claims it was the transfer of religious fervor to national ideals that lead to an American civil religion that blended the boundaries of the Christian gospel with civil narrative. Noll writes, "The nation rather than the church easily emerged as the primary agent in God's activity in history."^[Noll, The Search for Christian America, 114.] Concerning missionary methods toward immigrants, Americanization became an irreducible component of Christianization. The two terms were linked, one concept incomprehensible without the other. During the era, dozens of home missionary manuals were published, detailing methods of missionary engagement of the new immigration. Many of these manuals included sections on the proper means of Americanizing foreigners as part of their missions practice.^[See McCash, Isaac Newton. Horizon of American Missions (New York: Fleming H. Revell company, 1913) 169, section titled America Democratizing the World; McAfee, Joseph Ernest. Missions Striking Home: A Group of Addresses on a Phase of the Missionary Enterprise (New York: Fleming H. Revell Company, 1908), 111, section title The American 'E Pluribus Unum' of Grace; Grose, Howard Benjamin. Aliens Or Americans? (New York: Young People’s Missionary Movement of The United States and Canada, 1909), 231, see section titled Immigration and the National Character.] Some included Americanization in the title of the manual.^[Brooks, Charles Alvin. Christian Americanization: A Task for the Churches. Council of Women for Home Missions & Missionary Education Movement of the United States and Canada, 1919.]

American Protestants across the theological spectrum were concerned about the perfecting of society into the kingdom of God, namely the full Christianization of America. Handy writes, "Claiming that their nation's civilization was rooted in the premises of Protestant Christianity, its leaders aimed to make that civilization more fully Christian."^[Handy, Undermined Establishment, 11.] Harlan Douglass, in his manual  _The New Home Missions_, concludes with a chapter concerning the "social realization of Christianity in America" and the civil practices which can be undertaken by Christians to ensure the country becomes completely Christianized.^[Douglass, Harlan Paul. The New Home Missions: An Account of Their Social Redirection (New York: Missionary Education Movement of the United States and Canada, 1914), 225.] However, the reverse can also be said. American Protestants were broadly convinced of the importance of the Americanization of Christianity. Joseph Ernest McAfee speaks of God's "most eternally important use" for the American people, and warns against any egotism that could be resultant.^[McAfee, Missions Striking, 112.]

Americans widely held to the conviction that God had a specific, divine plan for the United States, an idea encapsulated in the term manifest destiny. Sandeen writes, "The eschatology of United States Protestants, reflecting their brimining optimism and hope, was expressed most frequently as a blending of millennialism and American nationalism."^[Sandeen, Roots, 43.] Furthermore, this blended eschatology placed American activity at the very center of God's plan for the rest of the world. God ordained the spread of their particular brand of Christianity and Civlization.^[Tuveson, Redeemer Nation, 76. See also Handy, Undermined Establishment, 8; Alhstrom, A Religious History, 845.] Ahlstrom writes, "To mainstream Protestants a denial of America's manifest destiny bordered on treason."^[Ahlstrom, A Religious History, 845.] For most American Protestants at the end of the nineteenth century, it was America's burden to Christianize and civilize the world, God's newest agent of the millennium. However, the success of this mission was contingent on their obedience to God in their given obligation.

American Protestants, with few exceptions, adopted an eschatalogical framework which can be referred to as a conditional manifest destiny. Americans possessed a longheld belief inthe manifest destiny of the United States in its westward, and eventually global, expansion.^[Horsman, Reginald. Race and Manifest Destiny (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981), 219-221, the phrase manifest destiny was coined by John O'Sullivan in 1845 to describe the westward expansion of the United States, in specific the annexation of Texas.] This destiny, most often attributed to God, was conceived as part opportunity and part obligation. McAfee concluded his home mission manual saying,

> There is nothing which can mean more for the good of the whole world and for the advancement of the kingdom of God in all the earth, than that the American people should be downright, upright, inright, outright Christian, and so prepared for the Christly mission for which God is ready to use them.^[McAfee, Joseph Ernest. Missions Striking Home: A Group of Addresses on a Phase of the Missionary Enterprise (New York: Fleming H. Revell Company, 1908), 121.]

For many, this was a naturalistic event, guided by the impersonal wheels of evolutionary science. However, Protestant Americans embraced a conditional variety of the doctrine that based success upon the continued obedience of the American people to the directives of God in his plan for history. Wendy Deichmann Edwards uses this term conditional manifest destiny to describe Josiah Strong's work  _Our Country._  Deichmann Edwards notes Strong was not the first to suggest a conditional understanding of manifest destiny, but that his work provides a seminal understanding of the concept for American Protestants during the Gilded Age and into the turn of the century.^[Deichmann Edwards, 175-176.]

In 1885, Josiah Strong published  _Out Country: It's Possible Future and Its Present Crisis_. The year prior, the American Home Missionary Society commissioned him to revise a former missionary tract by the same name. Building off the previous version of  _Our Country_, Strong recast and amplified its appeal for home missions in light of current events. The result would become one of the most popular books in the United States for the following decades, selling over 175,000 copies.^[Deichmann Edwards, 174, 191.] Strong uses the front matter of his book to build up the grand destiny of the American Protestant, specifically Anglo-Saxon, people and their divine role in God's plan for creating the kingdom of God. He explicitly claims that his present age is a pivotal moment in this plan and uses historical proofs to ground his claim. After establishing this privileged role, Strong then espouses the conditional nature of this manifest destiny. It was contingent upon American Protestants obediently seizing the moment and overcoming a series of perils that threaten to squash their moment in history and delay the coming kingdom by hundreds of years. The remainder of the book outlines these certain perils to the Christian mission and the American establishment. Strong writes,

> I cannot think our civilization will perish; but I believe it is fully in the hands of Christians in the United States, during the next fifteen or twenty years, to hasten or retard the coming of Christ's kingdom in the world by hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of years. We of this generation and nation occupy the Gibraltar of the ages which commands the world’s future.^[Strong, Our Country, 180.]

For Strong, the end of the nineteenth century was the second most important point in world history after the incarnation.^[Strong, Our Country, 177.] 

Not only did Strong's vision for home missions equate Christianity's mission with that of America, it equated America's destiny with that of a specifically Anglo-Saxon culture. In his chapter titled "The Anglo Saxon and the World's Futture," Strong uses dubious but contemporary social scientific theory regarding racial composition and hybridization in order to develop a more religious concept of Anglo-Saxon superiority.^[Strong, Our Country, 159.] Strong's conception of Anglo-Saxon is broadly defined, and he takes racial mixture as a defining characteristic of Anglo-Saxon exceptionality. "Mixed" races, he claims, are superior to "pure" races.^[Handy, Undermined Establishment, 18.] Nevertheless, this mixture would only maintain its potency if it carried the distinctly superior cultural characteristics of American Anglo-Saxonism. Strong's influence is hard to underestimate on contemporary missions methods during the turn of the century. The Great Commission was wholly clothed in the language of Christianize and Americanize, and the concurrent rise of immigration from non-Anglo, non-Protestant nations would require missionary methods aligned with this recast commission.

William Payne Shriver distills the missionary task of Christianization and Americanization toward immigrants into three parts: sympathy and resources from the church to aid the immigrant, "arouse and enrich the religious life" of the immigrant, and Americanize them. Of that last aspect of the mission, Shriver writes, "How may we inspire these diverse and polyglot peoples, together with our own and native Americans, with that common sympathy, understanding and ideal purpose which make for American Christian democracy?"^[Shriver, William Payne. Immigrant Forces: Factors in the New Democracy (New York: American Baptist Publication Society, 1913), 193.] For some Christianize and Americanize was conceived in optimistic terms as an opportunity for American Protestants to hasten their work of kingdom building by the promotion of Christian and American ideals. For others, it was cast in the ominous language of an impending threat. Though the lens of threat, Christians conceived of a mission to protect the kingdom they were establishing from incoming forces of that could potentially undermine their Christian civilization.

At the height of immigration during the era, ships were bringing around a million newcomers annually. American Protestants had long thought of immigration in optimistic terms concerning the promotion of the gospel. In fact, the earlier version of  _Our Country_  written before the Civil War claimed as much, referring to immigration as a "providential movement" and that, "God sends these multitudes hither for good and great ends."^[Society, Congregational Home Missionary. Our Country: No. 2 A Plea for Home Missions (American Home Missionary Society, 1858), 37.] This thread continued through the turn of the century, focusing on the opportunity to promote American cultural Christianity to immigrants. One article in a 1919 issue of  _Religious Education_  spoke of the role of churches in immigrant engagement,

> They can give all recently arrived immigrants some vision of the nobility of America, and their officials can preach loyalty and the unity of many races in one nation on the basis of brotherhood and that tradition of idealism upon which America is founded.^[Claxton, P. P. “CHURCHES AND AMERICANIZATION.” Religious Education, 1919. p 24.]

When viewed as an opportunity, these new foreign born residents, many Jewish and Catholic, presented a prime target from the promotion of Protestant Christianity wrapped in its American form.

Several home mission manuals written between 1880 and 1920 approached the issue in a hopeful tone, encouraging a promoting mission. Notable among these were the works of Howard B. Grose. A Baptist minister and professor, Grose served as the editorial secretary for the American Baptist Home Missionary Society from 1904-1910 and authored two manuals addressing missions to immigrants:  _Incoming Millions_  and  _Aliens or Americans?_.^[Loftus, Danielle. “LibGuides: Howard B. Grose: Overview,” 11 February 2015.  [https://libguides.usd.edu/grose](https://libguides.usd.edu/grose).] In the preface to  _Aliens or Americans?_, Grose himself notes the tendency to cast the missionary occasion of immigration as either opportunity or threat, claiming it should be seen as a hopeful opportunity. He writes, "Immigration may be regarded as a peril or a providence, an ogre or an obligation...The author is a Christian optimist who believes God has a unique mission for Christian America, and that it will ultimately be fulfilled."^[Grose, Aliens or Americans?, 10.] In both books, Grose employs rhetoric in his attempt to persuade his reader not to view immigrants as a threat but an opportunity. His section titles suggest threat language, yet in each section he painstaking humanizes the immigrant. His works are titled provocatively, and include sections like "The Invading Army," but the army he describes is profoundly human and has no ill-will toward the United States. Instead, he goes to great lengths to tell immigrant stories and outline legitimate reasons for their arrival.^[Grose, Incoming Millions, 9, 22, 26, 27. See also Grose, Aliens or Americans?, 15, 193.] Grose also espoused a conditional manifest destiny. He writes, "The alien can be Americanized upward or downward."^[Grose, Incoming Millions, 82.] If Grose employs threat language, it is the threat of inactivity on the part of Christians that allows unsightly American vices to take hold on the immigrant after arrival. Grose continues,

> How are these aliens being Americanized? For the most part the vote-buyer, the saloon keeper, the bribe-taker, the Jew sweater, the owner or agent of wretched and unsanitary tenements, are the ones who are teaching them what America is, what America stands for.^[Grose, Incoming Millions, 84.]

The threat is not immigration at all, but the unseemly slice of America that still exists and its corrupting influence on new arrivals. Immigration itself is a hopeful opportunity for advancing the mission, "if only American Christians are awake and faithful to their duty... Will we Christianize, which is the only real way to Americanize the Aliens?"^[Grose, Aliens or Americans, 10-11.]

Another category of manuals which saw promise in immigration were those written by immigrants themselves.  _Along the Highway of Service_, written by Marie Buhlmaier recounts her ministry at the docks in Baltimore among incoming immigrants. An immigrant herself, Marie served with the Home Mission Board of the Southern Baptist Convention distributing literature, welcoming immigrants, and helping connect them to various churches at their final landing places in the country.^[Buhlmaier, Marie. Along the Highway of Service (Atlanta: Home Mission Board of the Southern Baptist Convention, 1924), vii.] Buhlmaier writes with passion and sympathy for the plight of the immigrant and challenges her fellow Southern Baptists to see God as the "Great Director" of immigration.^[Buhlmaier, Along the Highway, 1-7.] In New York, Antonio Mangano served as the Director of the Italian Department at Colgate Theological Seminary. An immigrant from Italy, Mangano became a Christian through the influence of a Baptist church in Long Island. In  _Sons of Italy_, he provides an in depth look at Italian immigrants, and provides a plea for churches to see the opportunity they present for promoting Protestant Christianity.^[Mangano, Antonio. Sons of Italy: A Social and Religious Study of the Italians in America (New York: Missionary Education Movement of the United States and Canada, 1917), xi.] Mangano urges hospitality toward the immigrant, asking, "How can America hope to weld these people into good citizens if good Americans constantly look upon them as inferiors, studiously avoiding contact with them?"^[Mangano, Sons of Italy, 133.]

All Protestants did not view immigration with such optimism. It was perhaps more likely that American Protestants, largely from English or Western European descent, would see the waves of immigrant coming ashore each year as a threat to the civilization they were working so hard to build. The impetus to conceive of the mission as one of protection against outside cultural forces accounted for the plea by Mangano and Grose's rhetoric. The wave of immigrants was often met with negative reactions that resulted in ethnic and religious antagonism. The Protestant American majority culture was perhaps less concerned about the sheer number of immigrants than they were the provenance of these newcomers. In the 1880s, the largest surge of immigration came from Catholic lands and a different ethnic stock.^[Handy, Undermined Establishment, 17.] Nevertheless, a thread of this protection theme ran through many home mission manuals of the day.

The threat language is perhaps most clear in the writing of Josiah Strong. Significantly, Strong's revised edition of  _Our Country_  shifted the tone concerning immigration from providence to peril. Strong lists seven perils throughout his work that threaten the progress of building America into the kingdom of God. The first peril listed is the threat of immigration.^[Strong, Our Country, 30.] Strong writes,

> So immense a foreign element must have a profound influence on our national life and character. Immigration brings unquestioned benefits, but these do not concern our argument. It complicates almost every home missionary problem and furnishes the soil which feeds the life of several of the most noxious growths of our civlization.^[Strong, Our Country, 40.]

Strong's perils were directed as much, or more, toward threats to the Anglo-American way of life. Deichmann Edwards writes, "In all of this, he virtually equated the U.S. republican institutions which he perceived to be endangered by the seven perils with the foundations of Christian civilization."^[Deichman Edwards, 178.] As noted above, Strong's  _Our Country_  was one of the most influential treatments of home missions for decades to come. It was published at the beginning of the era and became an often-cited source in subsequent manuals.^[FIND A BUNCH THAT CITE OR USE STRONG. Grose, Aliens or Americans?, and others.]
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJkaXNjdXNzaW9ucyI6eyJxTjh0ZWZkWVpVWEE5Nzd2Ijp7In
RleHQiOiJLZXkgZG9jdHJpbmVzLCBzdWNoIGFzIG1pbGxlbm5p
YWwgdmlld3MgYW5kIG9uZSdzIHVuZGVyc3RhbmRpbmcgb2YgdG
hlIGtpbmdkb23igKYiLCJzdGFydCI6MjU0MSwiZW5kIjoyNzE3
fSwiM0tJeW5rVTFkYVNVaGZCYiI6eyJ0ZXh0IjoiOiIsInN0YX
J0Ijo5NjAzLCJlbmQiOjk2MDR9LCJINGNsNVlBcE1OUjdsek5P
Ijp7InRleHQiOiJ0aGUiLCJzdGFydCI6MTQ1NDEsImVuZCI6MT
Q1NDR9LCI4NFN2TmNlOE5rQkdKMEYzIjp7InRleHQiOiJQQVJB
R1JBUEgiLCJzdGFydCI6MjE4MjMsImVuZCI6MjE4MzJ9LCJReD
VTamNnTlE1VGpkclcwIjp7InRleHQiOiJ3b3JkbHkiLCJzdGFy
dCI6MjQzNzksImVuZCI6MjQzODV9LCJGazlsOGdDVTZ3VktkZE
p6Ijp7InRleHQiOiJ0aGUiLCJzdGFydCI6MjgwNDUsImVuZCI6
MjgwNDV9LCJRQlg1bjhBMDBSNzBFRTJwIjp7InRleHQiOiJDb2
5mZXJlbmNlcyIsInN0YXJ0IjoyOTE4NiwiZW5kIjoyOTE5N30s
IkpsSzM2TTVCbnNRY1dINDQiOnsidGV4dCI6InByZW1pbGxlbm
5pYWxpc20iLCJzdGFydCI6MzAxOTMsImVuZCI6MzAyMDl9LCJo
eWlWcmptQlhZeDhJaU9zIjp7InRleHQiOiJOZXZlcnRoZWxlc3
MiLCJzdGFydCI6MzE0NjgsImVuZCI6MzE0ODB9LCJpdUpnMFJw
ZmgyNDRaSldIIjp7InRleHQiOiJUaG91Z2giLCJzdGFydCI6Mz
k2MjksImVuZCI6Mzk2MzV9LCJDM3BYUVlFMlZzY3NUUFFRIjp7
InRleHQiOiJzaWMiLCJzdGFydCI6NDA2NjYsImVuZCI6NDA2Nj
l9LCJNWlZqd0d0RFp2REZlRXJkIjp7InRleHQiOiJGSU5EIiwi
c3RhcnQiOjQwOTkzLCJlbmQiOjQwOTk3fSwiZkdnenpRY3JuWk
daUFZRaSI6eyJ0ZXh0IjoiRklORCIsInN0YXJ0Ijo0NDM1Mywi
ZW5kIjo0NDM1N30sImtsVkZxOGNnV1duamNvc1oiOnsidGV4dC
I6IkluIiwic3RhcnQiOjQ1NDg1LCJlbmQiOjQ1NDg3fSwia1hH
OHY4cTZJeGFtdEFWZCI6eyJ0ZXh0IjoidGVsb3MiLCJzdGFydC
I6NDc5NjgsImVuZCI6NDc5NzN9LCI1WElKQnpRTnhwUGc1THZ0
Ijp7InRleHQiOiJDb25zaWRlciIsInN0YXJ0Ijo0ODkyNiwiZW
5kIjo0ODkzNH0sIlNybWtFdE9yUmgyMnRxZlIiOnsidGV4dCI6
IkZJTkQiLCJzdGFydCI6NTU3NzEsImVuZCI6NTU3NzV9LCJ0dT
ZRTnQxdW5mNVFKZkJoIjp7InRleHQiOiJ2b24gSGFybmFjayIs
InN0YXJ0Ijo1NzY1MiwiZW5kIjo1NzY2M30sIjRWR3FhZ0ZuWV
lDUlVpaEUiOnsidGV4dCI6IkZpbmQiLCJzdGFydCI6NjExNjEs
ImVuZCI6NjExNjV9LCJJN3VPSGl0UmhUNlJEd2FhIjp7InRleH
QiOiJGaW5kIiwic3RhcnQiOjYzMDM1LCJlbmQiOjYzMDM5fSwi
ZDQyc0ZRQ0NXZFlOQmRrZCI6eyJ0ZXh0IjoiY2l0ZSIsInN0YX
J0Ijo2OTAzNCwiZW5kIjo2OTAzOH0sImZ6ZFFKZEptMzhzYmI2
V2kiOnsidGV4dCI6InByb3Rlc3RhbnQiLCJzdGFydCI6NjkyNT
gsImVuZCI6NjkyNjh9LCJRblJKdjJ4R1VMTjM2ZHpaIjp7InRl
eHQiOiJeW0JveWVyLCBQYXVsLCBVcmJhbiBNYXNzZXMgYW5kIE
1vcmFsIE9yZGVyIGluIEFtZXJpY2EsIDE4MjAtMTkyMCAoQm9z
dG9uOiBIYXJ24oCmIiwic3RhcnQiOjc0ODE4LCJlbmQiOjc1MD
g0fSwiblAyemZQMmhBSVRGZWdFaSI6eyJ0ZXh0IjoiQ29uc2lk
ZXIiLCJzdGFydCI6NzU1NzMsImVuZCI6NzU1ODF9LCIyNHNSVj
Rzd2VuTEp5d1I3Ijp7InRleHQiOiJDb25zaWRlciIsInN0YXJ0
Ijo3NjI4MywiZW5kIjo3NjI5MX19LCJjb21tZW50cyI6eyJRRm
R4S041RVdtQTUyUjNnIjp7ImRpc2N1c3Npb25JZCI6InFOOHRl
ZmRZWlVYQTk3N3YiLCJzdWIiOiJnaDo3MTI5Mzk4NyIsInRleH
QiOiJ0aGlzIGlzIGJhc2ljYWxseSB0aGUgZXhhY3Qgc2FtZSBz
ZW50ZW5jZSBhdCB0aGUgZW5kIG9mIHRoZSBwYXJhZ3JhcGggYW
JvdmUiLCJjcmVhdGVkIjoxNjAwODAwMTA4OTEwfSwidzg3Rnlq
ODNBODJITjFLYiI6eyJkaXNjdXNzaW9uSWQiOiIzS0l5bmtVMW
RhU1VoZkJiIiwic3ViIjoiZ2g6NzEyOTM5ODciLCJ0ZXh0Ijoi
aXMgdGhpcyBzdXBwb3NlZCB0byBiZSBhIGNvbG9uPyIsImNyZW
F0ZWQiOjE2MDA4MDE2MTU1ODR9LCJmVHFmdUhaMHZvYTlYbGRU
Ijp7ImRpc2N1c3Npb25JZCI6InFOOHRlZmRZWlVYQTk3N3YiLC
JzdWIiOiJnaDozNzA0MDg0MSIsInRleHQiOiJoYWhhaGFoYSIs
ImNyZWF0ZWQiOjE2MDA4MTg4MTExNjR9LCJPaXpIdU9OakJzc0
dkeDR2Ijp7ImRpc2N1c3Npb25JZCI6InFOOHRlZmRZWlVYQTk3
N3YiLCJzdWIiOiJnaDozNzA0MDg0MSIsInRleHQiOiJQcm9iYW
JseSBzaG91bGQgcmVtb3ZlIGZyb20gdGhlIHBhcmFncmFwaCBh
Ym92ZS4gSXQgc2VlbXMgdG8gYmUgbmVlZGVkIGluIHRoaXMgcG
FyYWdyYXBoLiIsImNyZWF0ZWQiOjE2MDA4MTg4NjY3NjB9LCJn
Nkd6ZVhVUDJ2ZE9JQ3FMIjp7ImRpc2N1c3Npb25JZCI6IjNLSX
lua1UxZGFTVWhmQmIiLCJzdWIiOiJnaDozNzA0MDg0MSIsInRl
eHQiOiJUaGF0J3MgYSBnb29kIHF1ZXN0aW9uLiBJJ2xsIG5lZW
QgdG8gZ28gYmFjayBhbmQgZGlnIGl0IHVwIHRvIGtub3cuIiwi
Y3JlYXRlZCI6MTYwMDgxODg5Mjc2Nn0sIkJ0dzRUOG95VEJJZH
RrZUQiOnsiZGlzY3Vzc2lvbklkIjoiSDRjbDVZQXBNTlI3bHpO
TyIsInN1YiI6ImdoOjcxMjkzOTg3IiwidGV4dCI6ImRvIHlvdS
B3YW50IHRvIHVzZSBpbmRlZmluaXRlIG9yIGRlZmluaXRlIGFy
dGljbGUgaGVyZT8iLCJjcmVhdGVkIjoxNjAwODg4NDA3MDA3fS
wiZUowU1V1b0QzNlVNMjNNdyI6eyJkaXNjdXNzaW9uSWQiOiI4
NFN2TmNlOE5rQkdKMEYzIiwic3ViIjoiZ2g6NzEyOTM5ODciLC
J0ZXh0IjoiZG9uJ3QgZm9yZ2V0IHRvIGRvIHRoaXMiLCJjcmVh
dGVkIjoxNjAwODg5ODIxMDMxfSwiVlFWMnNFWWFVNjBQbDRSNC
I6eyJkaXNjdXNzaW9uSWQiOiJReDVTamNnTlE1VGpkclcwIiwi
c3ViIjoiZ2g6NzEyOTM5ODciLCJ0ZXh0Ijoic2hvdWxkIHRoaX
MgYmUgd29ybGRseT8iLCJjcmVhdGVkIjoxNjAwODkwMDM4OTQ3
fSwiMnVmeXZXb0ZHN0hPbEo4ZiI6eyJkaXNjdXNzaW9uSWQiOi
JGazlsOGdDVTZ3VktkZEp6Iiwic3ViIjoiZ2g6NzEyOTM5ODci
LCJ0ZXh0Ijoib2YgdGhlIHdoYXQ/IiwiY3JlYXRlZCI6MTYwMD
g5MDI0MjEwMn0sIkxMZFZXN1N3U2U5cEhQdnMiOnsiZGlzY3Vz
c2lvbklkIjoiUUJYNW44QTAwUjcwRUUycCIsInN1YiI6ImdoOj
cxMjkzOTg3IiwidGV4dCI6ImlzIHRoaXMgbWVhbnQgdG8gYmUg
YSBzZXBhcmF0ZSBwYXJhZ3JhcGg/IiwiY3JlYXRlZCI6MTYwMD
g5MDMxNTEwN30sInVkcFc3RDViYUNoZkc0a20iOnsiZGlzY3Vz
c2lvbklkIjoiSmxLMzZNNUJuc1FjV0g0NCIsInN1YiI6ImdoOj
cxMjkzOTg3IiwidGV4dCI6ImlzIHRoaXMgc3VwcG9zZWQgdG8g
YmUgYSBzZXBhcmF0ZSBwYXJhZ3JhcGg/IiwiY3JlYXRlZCI6MT
YwMDg5MDM2NzE0OH0sIjhQaGVqVjNXeGRpTkxQaTQiOnsiZGlz
Y3Vzc2lvbklkIjoiaHlpVnJqbUJYWXg4SWlPcyIsInN1YiI6Im
doOjcxMjkzOTg3IiwidGV4dCI6ImlzIHRoaXMgc3VwcG9zZWQg
dG8gYmUgYSBzZXBhcmF0ZSBwYXJhZ3JhcGg/IiwiY3JlYXRlZC
I6MTYwMDg5MDQ1OTQ2NH0sInZ0dmJmOENQdmlvNFZabEsiOnsi
ZGlzY3Vzc2lvbklkIjoiSmxLMzZNNUJuc1FjV0g0NCIsInN1Yi
I6ImdoOjM3MDQwODQxIiwidGV4dCI6Im5vIiwiY3JlYXRlZCI6
MTYwMTA0MTk5NTE3MX0sIjRnWFNxRGg4b3M5V1JrQ1giOnsiZG
lzY3Vzc2lvbklkIjoiaHlpVnJqbUJYWXg4SWlPcyIsInN1YiI6
ImdoOjM3MDQwODQxIiwidGV4dCI6Im5vIiwiY3JlYXRlZCI6MT
YwMTA0MjAwNTA2MX0sIndZVkFsWHhUR0I0SWltd0siOnsiZGlz
Y3Vzc2lvbklkIjoiaXVKZzBScGZoMjQ0WkpXSCIsInN1YiI6Im
doOjcxMjkzOTg3IiwidGV4dCI6ImRvbnQgZm9yZ2V0IiwiY3Jl
YXRlZCI6MTYwMTE0NTQwMjQ2Mn0sImdDSk5MZnM4ZWk5QUNUck
wiOnsiZGlzY3Vzc2lvbklkIjoiQzNwWFFZRTJWc2NzVFBRUSIs
InN1YiI6ImdoOjcxMjkzOTg3IiwidGV4dCI6IndoeSBpcyB0aG
lzIGhlcmU/IiwiY3JlYXRlZCI6MTYwMTE0NTQ3NzYyNn0sIkVn
Q1FwY1NFanZ6djlHYm4iOnsiZGlzY3Vzc2lvbklkIjoiTVpWan
dHdERadkRGZUVyZCIsInN1YiI6ImdoOjcxMjkzOTg3IiwidGV4
dCI6ImRvbid0IGZvcmdldCIsImNyZWF0ZWQiOjE2MDExNDU1Mj
A1MzB9LCJsWHNBenUxYkZ4VlRiZHQxIjp7ImRpc2N1c3Npb25J
ZCI6ImZHZ3p6UWNyblpHWlBWUWkiLCJzdWIiOiJnaDo3MTI5Mz
k4NyIsInRleHQiOiJkb24ndCBmb3JnZXQiLCJjcmVhdGVkIjox
NjAxMTQ2NDM1OTQyfSwiVENhZ2lucDc3MnBEdGJJQiI6eyJkaX
NjdXNzaW9uSWQiOiJrbFZGcThjZ1dXbmpjb3NaIiwic3ViIjoi
Z2g6NzEyOTM5ODciLCJ0ZXh0Ijoic2hvdWxkIHRoaXMgYmUgYS
BuZXcgcGFyYWdyYXBoPyIsImNyZWF0ZWQiOjE2MDExNDY2NTcy
Mzl9LCJSNmxQVmFnWGhabHVUakdxIjp7ImRpc2N1c3Npb25JZC
I6ImtYRzh2OHE2SXhhbXRBVmQiLCJzdWIiOiJnaDo3MTI5Mzk4
NyIsInRleHQiOiJzaG91bGQgdGhpcyBiZSBpdGFsaWNpemVkIi
wiY3JlYXRlZCI6MTYwMTE0Njk2MTMyM30sIlJZb0FUbXhkZGw4
SFVPR0oiOnsiZGlzY3Vzc2lvbklkIjoiNVhJSkJ6UU54cFBnNU
x2dCIsInN1YiI6ImdoOjcxMjkzOTg3IiwidGV4dCI6ImRvbid0
IGZvcmdldCIsImNyZWF0ZWQiOjE2MDExNDcwMzM4Njd9LCJMZ2
NWcUtQUDNwU0MwS1FGIjp7ImRpc2N1c3Npb25JZCI6IlNybWtF
dE9yUmgyMnRxZlIiLCJzdWIiOiJnaDo3MTI5Mzk4NyIsInRleH
QiOiJkb24ndCBmb3JnZXQiLCJjcmVhdGVkIjoxNjAxMTQ3NDU2
MDgyfSwiT25Pb2xBSmhLTVdEUTZ2cCI6eyJkaXNjdXNzaW9uSW
QiOiJ0dTZRTnQxdW5mNVFKZkJoIiwic3ViIjoiZ2g6NzEyOTM5
ODciLCJ0ZXh0IjoibmVlZCB0byBjaGVjayByZWZlcmVuY2VzIH
RvIHRoaXMgbWFuIGJlY2F1c2Ugc29tZXRpbWVzIHlvdSB1c2Ug
XCJ2b25cIiBhbmQgc29tZXRpbWVzIHlvdSBkb24ndC4iLCJjcm
VhdGVkIjoxNjAxMTQ3NjM2ODAyfSwiOGdBcElGSlFxemFsTE9u
RCI6eyJkaXNjdXNzaW9uSWQiOiI0VkdxYWdGbllZQ1JVaWhFIi
wic3ViIjoiZ2g6NzEyOTM5ODciLCJ0ZXh0IjoiZG9uJ3QgZm9y
Z2V0IiwiY3JlYXRlZCI6MTYwMTMyODE3MDM2OX0sIm5vTTQxcj
Z5NVpRVzhOSHYiOnsiZGlzY3Vzc2lvbklkIjoiSTd1T0hpdFJo
VDZSRHdhYSIsInN1YiI6ImdoOjcxMjkzOTg3IiwidGV4dCI6Im
Rvbid0IGZvcmdldCIsImNyZWF0ZWQiOjE2MDEzMjg1NTEyODh9
LCJKSElUM3RNSVpLVHJONzlIIjp7ImRpc2N1c3Npb25JZCI6Im
Q0MnNGUUNDV2RZTkJka2QiLCJzdWIiOiJnaDo3MTI5Mzk4NyIs
InRleHQiOiJkb24ndCBmb3JnZXQiLCJjcmVhdGVkIjoxNjAxNT
E1NDExODU1fSwiUU9hdXlEdk83ZVpteDJ4aCI6eyJkaXNjdXNz
aW9uSWQiOiJmemRRSmRKbTM4c2JiNldpIiwic3ViIjoiZ2g6Nz
EyOTM5ODciLCJ0ZXh0Ijoic2hvdWxkIHRoaXMgYmUgY2FwaXRh
bGl6ZWQ/IiwiY3JlYXRlZCI6MTYwMTUxNTUwOTc5NX0sInduRG
FvYWF6bXZqU1lrZE0iOnsiZGlzY3Vzc2lvbklkIjoiUW5SSnYy
eEdVTE4zNmR6WiIsInN1YiI6ImdoOjcxMjkzOTg3IiwidGV4dC
I6InRoaXMgZm9vdG5vdGUgaXMgbm90IGZvcm1hdHRpbmcgY29y
cmVjdGx5IiwiY3JlYXRlZCI6MTYwMTU4NTg0Mjg2NH0sIk5BVk
M2dE8ySXJSSE9acnMiOnsiZGlzY3Vzc2lvbklkIjoiblAyemZQ
MmhBSVRGZWdFaSIsInN1YiI6ImdoOjcxMjkzOTg3IiwidGV4dC
I6ImRvbid0IGZvcmdldCIsImNyZWF0ZWQiOjE2MDE2Mzc5ODMz
MDd9LCJoMkRnZTJhQzZpTkVuRVJYIjp7ImRpc2N1c3Npb25JZC
I6IjI0c1JWNHN3ZW5MSnl3UjciLCJzdWIiOiJnaDo3MTI5Mzk4
NyIsInRleHQiOiJkb24ndCBmb3JnZXQiLCJjcmVhdGVkIjoxNj
AxNjM4MDQyNzYyfX0sImhpc3RvcnkiOlstNzY4NTQ4NTIzLDIw
MDI1Mjc5MjQsLTQzNDQwMjYyNF19
-->